Project Gutenberg's Charles Auchester, Volume 1 of 2, by Elizabeth Sheppard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Charles Auchester, Volume 1 of 2

Author: Elizabeth Sheppard

Release Date: February 22, 2012 [EBook #38949]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES AUCHESTER, VOLUME 1 OF 2 ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by =equal
  signs=.




  CHARLES AUCHESTER

  VOLUME I.

  [Illustration: MENDELSSOHN
   FROM AN ORIGINAL PORTRAIT--1821.]




  CHARLES AUCHESTER

  BY
  ELIZABETH SHEPPARD

  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES_
  BY GEORGE P. UPTON

  AUTHOR OF "THE STANDARD OPERAS," "STANDARD ORATORIOS," "STANDARD
  CANTATAS," "STANDARD SYMPHONIES," "WOMAN IN MUSIC," ETC.

  In Two Volumes

  VOLUME I.

  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG AND COMPANY
  1891




  COPYRIGHT,
  BY A. C. MCCLURG AND CO.
  A.D. 1891.




INTRODUCTION.


The romance of "Charles Auchester," which is really a memorial to
Mendelssohn, the composer, was first published in England in 1853. The
titlepage bore the name of "E. Berger," a French pseudonym, which for
some time served to conceal the identity of the author. Its motto was
a sentence from one of Disraeli's novels: "Were it not for Music, we
might in these days say, The Beautiful is dead." The dedication was
also to the same distinguished writer, and ran thus: "To the author of
'Contarini Fleming,' whose perfect genius suggested this imperfect
history." To this flattering dedication, Mr. Disraeli replied in a
note to the author: "No greater book will ever be written upon music,
and it will one day be recognized as the imaginative classic of that
divine art."

Rarely has a book had a more propitious introduction to the public;
but it was destined to encounter the proverbial fickleness of that
public. The author was not without honor save in her own country. It
was reserved for America first to recognize her genius. Thence her
fame travelled back to her own home; but an early death prevented her
from enjoying the fruits of her enthusiastic toil. Other works
followed from her busy pen, among them "Counterparts,"--a
musico-philosophical romance, dedicated to Mrs. Disraeli, which had a
certain success; "Rumor," of which Beethoven, under the name of
Rodomant, is supposed to have been the hero; "Beatrice Reynolds,"
"The Double Coronet," and "Almost a Heroine:" but none of them
achieved the popularity which "Charles Auchester" enjoyed. They shone
only by the reflected light of this wonderful girl's first book. The
republication of this romance will recall to its readers of an earlier
generation an old enthusiasm which may not be altogether lost, though
they may smile as they read and remember. It should arouse a new
enthusiasm in the younger generation of music-lovers.

Elizabeth Sheppard, the author of "Charles Auchester," was born at
Blackheath, near London, in 1837. Her father was a clergyman of the
Established Church, and her mother a Jewess by descent,--which serves
to account for the daughter's strong Jewish sympathies in this
remarkable display of hero-worship. Left an orphan at a tender age,
she was thrown upon her own resources, and chose school-teaching for
her profession. She was evidently a good linguist and musician, for
she taught music and the languages before she was sixteen. She had
decided literary ambition also, and wrote plays, poems, and short
stories at an age when other children are usually engaged in pastimes.
Notwithstanding the arduous nature of her work and her exceedingly
delicate health, she devoted her leisure hours to literary
composition. How this frail girl must have toiled is evidenced by the
completion of "Charles Auchester" in her sixteenth year. In her
seventeenth she had finished "Counterparts,"--a work based upon a
scheme even more ambitious than that of her first story. When it is
considered that these two romances were written at odd moments of
leisure intervening between hours of wearing toil in the school-room,
and that she was a mere child and very frail, it will be admitted that
the history of literary effort hardly records a parallel case. Nature
however always exacts the penalty for such mental excesses. This
little creature of "spirit, fire, and dew" died on March 13, 1862, at
the early age of twenty-five.

Apart from its intrinsic merits as a musical romance, there are some
features of "Charles Auchester" of more than ordinary interest. It is
well known that Seraphael, its leading character, is the author's
ideal of Mendelssohn, and that the romance was intended to be a
memorial of him. More thoroughly to appreciate the work, and not set
it down as mere rhapsody, it must be remembered that Miss Sheppard
wrote it in a period of Mendelssohn worship in England as ardent and
wellnigh as universal as the Handel worship of the previous century
had been. It was written in 1853. Mendelssohn had been dead but six
years, and his name was still a household word in every English
family. He was adored, not only for his musical genius, but also for
his singular purity of character. He was personally as well known in
England as any native composer. His Scotch Symphony and Hebrides
Overture attested his love of Scotch scenery. He had conducted
concerts in the provinces; he appeared at concerts in London in 1829
and in subsequent years, and was the idol of the drawing-rooms of that
day. Some of his best works were written on commissions from the
London Philharmonic Society. He conducted his "Lobgesang" at
Birmingham in 1840, and he produced his immortal "Elijah" in the same
town in 1846,--only a year before his death. There were numerous ties
of regard, and even of affection, binding him to the English people.
From a passing remark in the course of the romance, we learn that it
opens about the year 1833, when Mendelssohn was in his prime; and as
it closes with his death, it thus covers a period of fourteen
years,--the most brilliant and productive part of his life.

Curious critics of "Charles Auchester" have found close resemblances
between its characters and other musicians. There is good reason to
believe that Starwood Burney was intended for Sterndale Bennett, not
only from the resemblance of the names in sound and meaning, but also
from many other events common to each. It requires, however, some
stretch of the imagination to believe that Charles Auchester was
intended as a portrait of Joachim the violinist; that Aronach, the
teacher at the St. Cecilia School, was meant for Zelter; Clara Benette
for Jenny Lind; and Laura Lemark for Taglioni. It is altogether likely
that the author in drawing these characters had the types in mind, and
without intending to produce a parallel or to preserve anything like
synchronism, invested them with some of the characteristics of the
real persons, all of whom, it may be added, except Taglioni, were
intimately associated with Mendelssohn.

All this lends the charm of human interest to the book; but, after
all, it is the author's personality that invests it with its rare
fascination. It would not bear searching literary criticism;
fortunately, no one has been so ungracious as to apply it. It is more
to the purpose to remember that here is a young girl of exquisite
refinement, rare intellectuality, and the most overwhelming
enthusiasm, who has written herself into her work with all her girlish
fancies, her great love for the art, her glowing imagination, and that
rapturous devotion for the hero of her exalted world which is
characteristic of her sex at sixteen. And in doing this she has
pictured her dreams with most glowing colors, and told them with
delicate _naïveté_ and exuberant passion. In a word, she has expressed
the very spirit of music in language, and in a language so pure and
adoring as to amount to worship. In Disraeli's words, it is "the
imaginative classic of the divine art." To those who have not lost
their early enthusiasms, this little book will come like the perfume
of a flower, or some tone of a well-remembered voice, recalling the
old days and reviving an old pleasure. To those who have lost such
emotions, what is left but Lethe?

In preparing the work for publication, I have added some brief notes,
indicating the connection between the real and the ideal, and making
the meaning of the text clearer to the general reader of to-day.
Anything which will throw light upon this charming romance should be
welcome, and the more so that the gifted author has been strangely
neglected both in musical and general biographical dictionaries. It is
to be hoped that an adequate sketch of her life may some day appear.

     GEORGE P. UPTON.

     _Chicago, 1891._




CHARLES AUCHESTER.




CHAPTER I.


I never wrote a long letter in my life. It is the manual part I
dislike,--arranging the paper, holding the pen in my fingers, and
finding my arm exhausted with carrying it to and from the inkstand. It
does not signify, though; for I have made arrangements with my
free-will to write more than a letter,--a life, or rather the life of
a life. Let none pause to consider what this means,--neither quite
Germanly mysterious, nor quite Saxonly simple, like my origin.

There are many literal presentations of ordinary personages in books
which, I am informed, and I suppose I am to assure myself, are
introduced expressly to intensify and illustrate the chief and
peculiar interest where an interest is, or to allure the attention of
the implicit, where it is not. But how does it happen that the
delineations of the gods among men, the heroic, gifted few, the beings
of imaginative might or genius, are so infinitely more literal?
Who--worshipping, if not strong enough to serve, the Ideal--can endure
the graceless ignorance of his subject betrayed by many a biographer,
accepted and accomplished in his style? Who, so worshipping, can do
anything but shudder at the meagre, crude, mistakable portraits of
Shakspeare, of Verulam, of Beethoven? Heaven send my own may not make
me shudder first, and that in my attempt to recall, through a kind of
artistic interlight, a few remembered lineaments, I be not
self-condemned to blush for the spiritual craft whose first law only I
had learned.

I know how many notions grown persons entertain of their childhood as
real, which are factitious, and founded upon elder experience, until
they become confounded with it; but I also feel that in great part we
neglect our earliest impressions, as vague, which were the truest and
best we ever had. I believe none can recall their childish estimate or
essence without identifying within their present intimate selves. In
my own case the analogy is perfect between my conceptions then and my
positive existence now. So every one must feel who is at all
acquainted with the liabilities of those who follow art.

The man of power may manage to merge his individuality in his
expansive association with the individuality of others; the man of
science quenches self-consciousness in abstraction; and not a few who
follow with hot energy some worldly calling, become, in its exercise,
as itself, nor for a solitary moment are left alone with their
personality to remember even that as separate and distinctly real.

But all artists, whether acknowledged or amateur, must have proved
that, for themselves, the gauge of immortality, in life as in art,
consists in their self-acquaintance, their self-reliance, their exact
self-appreciation with reference to their masters, their models, their
one supreme ideal.

I was born in a city of England farthest from the sea, within whose
liberties my grandfather and father had resided, acquiring at once a
steady profit and an honorable commercial fame. Never mind what they
were, or in which street or square their stocked warehouses were
planted, alluring the eyes and hearts of the pupils of Adam Smith. I
remember the buildings well; but my elder brother, the eldest of our
family, was established there when I first recall them, and he was
always there, residing on the premises. He was indeed very many years
my senior, and I little knew him; but he was a steady, excellent
person, with a tolerable tenor voice and punctilious filial
observances towards our admirable mother. My father was born in
England; but though his ancestors were generally Saxon, an infusion of
Norman blood had taken place in his family a generation or two behind
him, and I always suspected that we owed to the old breeding of Claire
Renée de Fontenelle some of our peculiarities and refinements; though
my father always maintained that they flowed directly from our mother.
He was travelling for the house upon the Continent when he first found
her out, embedded like a gem by a little German river; and she left
with him, unrepiningly, her still but romantic home, not again to
revisit it.

My mother must have been in her girlhood, as she was in her maturest
years, a domestic presence of purity, kindliness, and home-heartedness;
she had been accustomed to every kind of household manoeuvre, and her
needlework was something exquisite. From her German mother she
inherited the quietness of which grace is born, the prudence with
which wisdom dwells, and many an attribute of virtue; but from her
father she inherited the right to name herself of Hebrew origin.
Herein my chief glory lies; and whatever enlightenment my destiny has
boasted, streams from that radiant point. I know that there are many
who would as genuinely rejoice in descent from Mahomet, from Attila,
or from Robin Hood, as from any of Israel's children; but I claim the
golden link in my genealogy as that which connects it with eternity
and with all that in my faith is glorious.[1]

My mother had lived in a certain seclusion for some years before I
first began to realize; for my father died before my first year's
close. We still resided near the house of business,--not in it, for
that was my brother's now, and Fred had lately brought home a wife.
But we were quite settled and at home in the house I first remember,
when it breaks, picture-like, on my dawning memory. I had three
sisters: Clotilda was the oldest, and only a year younger than Fred.
She was an extraordinarily clever person, though totally destitute of
art or artistic yearnings. She had been educated unwontedly, and at
least understood all that she had learned. Her favorite pursuits were
reading, and comparing lexicons and analyses of different languages,
and endeavoring to find common roots for all; but she could and did
work perfectly, write a fine, close hand, and very vigorously
superintend the household in my mother's absence or indisposition. She
had rather a queer face, like one of the Puritan visages in antique
portraits; but a very cheerful smile, and perfect composure of
manner,--a great charm in mine eyes, O ye nymphs and graces! Millicent,
three years younger, was a spirit of gentleness,--imperceptibly
instructing me, she must be treated with a sort of awe. Her melancholy
oval face and her pale eyelids showed more of the Hebrew than any of
us excepting myself; only I was plain, and she remarkably pleasing.
Lydia, my youngest sister, was rather showy than brilliant, and rather
bright than keen,--but not much of either; and yet she was always kind
to me, and I should have grieved to miss her round brown eyes at our
breakfast-table, or her loud, ringing laugh upstairs from the kitchen;
for she had the pantry key.

Both Millicent and Lydia played and sang, if not very powerfully, yet
with superior taste. Millicent's notes, not many in number, were as
the notes of a cooing dove. Before I was five years old I used to sit
upon the old grand piano and watch their faces while they sang on
Sunday evenings,--my mother in a tremulous soprano, with Fred's tenor,
and the bass of a friend of his. This did not please me; and here let
me say that musical temperament as surely asserts itself in aversion
to discordant, or not pure, as in desire for sweet and true sounds. I
am certain this is true. I was always happy when Millicent sang alone,
or even when she and Lydia mixed their notes; for both had an ear as
accurate for tune and for time as can be found in England, or indeed
in Germany. But oh! I have writhed beneath the dronings of
Hatchardson's bass, on quartet or chorale an audible blemish, and in a
rare composition now and then, the distorting and distracting point on
which I was morbidly obliged to fasten my attention. We had no other
music, except a little of the same kind, not quite so good, from
various members of families in the neighborhood professing to play or
sing. But I will not dwell on those, for they are displaced by images
more significant.

I can never recollect a time when I did not sing. I believe I sang
before I spoke. Not that I possessed a voice of miraculous power, but
that everything resolved itself into a species of inward rhythm, not
responsive to by words, but which passed into sound, tone, and
measure before I knew it was formed. Every sight as well as all that
touched my ears produced this effect. I could not watch the smoke
ascending, nor the motions of the clouds, nor, subtler yet, the stars
peeping through the vaulted twilight, without the framing and
outpouring of exuberant emotion in strains so expressive to my own
intelligence that it was entranced by them completely. I was a very
ailing child for several years, and only the cares I received
preserved me then; but now I feel as if all healthfulness had been
engendered by the mere vocal abstraction into which I was plunged a
great part of every day. I had been used to hear music discussed,
slightly, it is true, but always reverently, and I early learned there
were those who followed that--the supreme of art--in the very town we
inhabited,--indeed, my sisters had taken lessons of a lady a pupil of
Clementi; but she had left for London before I knew my notes.

Our piano had been a noble instrument,--one of the first and best that
displaced the harpsichords of Kirkman.[2] Well worn, it had also been
well used, and when deftly handled, had still some delights
extricable. It stood in our drawing-room, a chamber of the red-brick
house that held us,--rather the envy of our neighbors, for it had a
beautiful ceiling, carved at the centre and in the corners with
bunches and knots of lilies. It was a high and rather a large room. It
was filled with old furniture, rather handsome and exquisitely kept,
and was a temple of awe to me, because I was not allowed to play
there, and only sometimes to enter it,--as, for example, on Sundays,
or when we had tea-parties, or when morning callers came and asked to
see me; and whenever I did enter, I was not suffered to touch the rug
with my feet, nor to approach the sparkling steel of the fire-irons
and fender nearer than its moss-like edge. Our drawing-room was, in
fact, a curious confusion of German stiffness and English comfort; but
I did not know this then.

We generally sat in the parlor looking towards the street and the
square tower of an ancient church. The windows were draped with
dark-blue moreen, and between them stood my mother's dark-blue velvet
chair, always covered with dark-blue cloth, except on Sundays and on
New Year's day and at the feast of Christmas.

The dark-blue drugget covered a polished floor, whose slippery,
uncovered margin beneath the wainscot has occasioned me many a tumble,
though it always tempted me to slide when I found myself alone in the
room. There were plenty of chairs in the parlor, and a few little
tables, besides a large one in the centre, over which hung a dark-blue
cover, with a border of glowing orange. I was fond of the high
mantelshelf, whose ornaments were a German model of a bad Haus, and
two delicate wax nuns, to say nothing of the china candlesticks, the
black Berlin screens, and the bronze pastille-box.

Of all things I gloried in the oak closets--one filled with books, the
other with glass and china--on either side of the fireplace; nor did I
despise the blue cloth stools, beautifully embroidered by Clo, just
after her sampler days, in wool oak-wreaths rich with acorns. I used
to sit upon these alternately at my mother's feet, for she would not
permit one to be used more than the other; and I was a very obedient
infant.

My greatest trial was going to church, because the singing was so
wretchedly bad that it made my ears ache. Often I complained to my
mother; but she always said we could not help it if ignorant persons
were employed to praise God, that it ought to make us more ready to
stand up and sing, and answer our very best, and that none of us could
praise him really as the angels do. This was not anything of an
answer, but I persisted in questioning her, that I might see whether
she ever caught a new idea upon the subject. But no; and thus I
learned to lean upon my own opinion before I was eight years old, for
I never went to church till I was seven. Clo thought that there should
be no singing in church,--she had a dash of the Puritan in her creed;
but Lydia horrified my mother oftentimes by saying she should write to
the organist about revising the choir. But here my childish wisdom
crept in, and whispered to me that nothing could be done with such a
battered, used-up, asthmatic machine as our decrepit organ, and I gave
up the subject in despair.

Still, Millicent charmed me one night by silencing Fred and Mr.
Hatchardson when they were prosing of Sternhold and Hopkins, and Tate
and Brady,[3] and singing-galleries and charity-children, by saying,--

"You all forget that music is the highest gift that God bestows, and
its faculty the greatest blessing. It must be the only form of worship
for those who are musically endowed,--that is, if they employ it
aright."

Millicent had a meek manner of administering a wholesome truth which
another would have pelted at the hearer; but then Millicent spoke
seldom, and never unless it was necessary. She read, she practised,
she made up mantles and caps _à ravir_, and she visited poor sick
people; but still I knew she was not happy, though I could not
conceive nor conjecture why. She did not teach me anything, and Lydia
would have dreamed first of scaling Parnassus. But Clo's honorable
ambition had always been to educate me; and as she was really
competent, my mother made no objection. I verily owe a great deal to
her. She taught me to read English, French, and German between my
eighth and tenth years; but then we all knew German in our cradles, as
my mother had for us a nurse from her own land. Clo made me also spell
by a clever system of her own, and she got me somehow into
subtraction; but I was a great concern to her in one respect,--I never
got on with my writing. I believe she and my mother entertained some
indefinite notion of my becoming, in due time, the junior partner of
the firm. This prescience of theirs appalled me not, for I never
intended to fulfil it, and I thought, justly enough, that there was
plenty of time before me to undo their arrangements. I always went to
my lessons in the parlor from nine till twelve, and again in the
afternoon for an hour, so that I was not overworked; but even when I
was sitting by Clo,--she, glorious creature! deep in Leyden or
Gesenius--I used to chant my geography or my Telemachus to my secret
springs of song, without knowing how or why, but still chanting as my
existence glided.

I had tolerable walks in the town and about through the dusty lanes
with my sisters or my nurse, for I was curious; and, to a child,
freshness is inspiration, and old sights seen afresh seem new.

I liked of all things to go to the chemist's when my mother
replenished her little medicine-chest. There was unction in the smell
of the packeted, ticketed drugs, in the rosy cinnamon, the golden
manna, the pungent vinegar, and the aromatic myrrh. How I delighted in
the copper weights, the spirit-lamp, the ivory scales, the vast
magazines of lozenges, and the delicate lip-salve cases, to say
nothing of the glittering toilet bagatelles, and perfumes and soaps! I
mention all this just because the only taste that has ever become
necessary to me in its cultivation, besides music, is chemistry, and I
could almost say I know not which I adhere to most; but Memory
comes,--

      "And with her flying finger sweeps my lip."

I forbear.

I loved the factories, to some of which I had access. I used to think
those wheels and whirring works so wonderful that they were like the
inside of a man's brain. My notion was nothing pathetic of the pale
boys and lank girls about, for they seemed merely stirring or moveless
parts of the mechanism. I am afraid I shall be thought very unfeeling;
I am not aware that I was, nevertheless.

I sometimes went out to tea in the town; I did not like it, but I did
it to please my mother. At one or two houses I was accustomed to a
great impression of muffins, cake, and marmalade, with coffee and
cream; and the children I met there did nothing adequately but eat. At
a few houses, again, I fared better, for they only gave us little
loaves of bread and little cups of tea, and we romped the evening
long, and dramatized our elders and betters until the servants came
for us. But I, at least, was always ready to go home, and glad to see
my short, wide bed beside my mother's vast one, and my spotless dimity
curtains with the lucid muslin frills; and how often I sang the best
tunes in my head to the nameless effect of rosemary and lavender that
haunted my large white pillow!

We always went to bed, and breakfasted, very early, and I usually had
an hour before nine wherein to disport myself as I chose. It was in
these hours Millicent taught me to sing from notes and to discern the
aspect of the key-board. Of the crowding associations, the teeming
remembrances, just at infancy and early childhood, I reject all,
except such as it becomes positively necessary I should recall;
therefore I dwell not upon this phase of my life, delightful as it
was, and stamped with perfect purity,--the reflex of an unperverted
temperament and of kindly tenderness.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The character of Charles Auchester is supposed to have been
intended for a sketch of the violinist Joachim, whose talent was first
recognized by Mendelssohn, and who studied for many years at Leipsic
under that composer's influence, though his own writings betray a
strong leaning towards Schumann.

[2] A family of eminent harpsichord-makers. Jacob, the founder of the
business, went to London from Germany early in the last century, and
died in 1778. The business has been continued through five
generations, and is now conducted by Joseph Kirkman in the same city.

[3] Compilers of English psalmody in the last century.




CHAPTER II.


We had a town-hall,--a very imposing building of its class, and it was
not five minutes' walk from the square-towered church I mentioned. It
was, I well knew, a focus of some excitement at election times and
during the assizes, also in the spring, when religious meetings were
held there; yet I had never been in it, and seldom near it,--my mother
preferring us to keep as clear of the town proper as possible. Yet I
knew well where it stood, and I had an inkling now and then that music
was to be heard there; furthermore, within my remembrance, Millicent
and Lydia had been taken by Fred to hear Paganini within its
precincts. I was too young to know anything of the triennial festival
that distinguished our city as one of the most musical in England, at
that time almost the only one, indeed, so honored and glorified. I
said, what I must again repeat, that I knew nothing of such a
prospective or past event until the end of the summer in which I
entered my eleventh year.

I was too slight for my health to be complete, but very strong for one
so slight. Neither was I tall, but I had an innate love of grace and
freedom, which governed my motions; for I was extremely active, could
leap, spring, and run with the best, though I always hated walking. I
believe I should have died under any other care than that expanded
over me, for my mother abhorred the forcing system. Had I belonged to
those who advocate excessive early culture, my brain would, I
believe, have burst, so continually was it teeming. But from my
lengthy idleness alternating with moderate action, I had no strain
upon my faculties.

How perfectly I recollect the morning, early in autumn, on which the
festival was first especially suggested to me! It was a very bright
day, but so chilly that we had a fire in the parlor grate, for we were
all disposed to be very comfortable as part of our duty. I had said
all my lessons, and was now sitting at the table writing a small text
copy in a ruled book, with an outside marbled fantastically brown and
blue, which book lay, not upon the cloth, of course, but upon an
inclined plane formed of a great leather case containing about a quire
of open blotting-paper.

My sister Clotilda was over against me at the table, with the light
shaded from her eyes by a green fan screen, studying, as usual, in the
morning hours, a Greek Testament full of very neat little black notes.
I remember her lead-colored gown, her rich washing silk, and her clear
white apron, her crimson muffetees and short, close black mittens, her
glossy hair rolled round her handsome tortoise-shell comb, and the
bunch of rare though quaint ornaments--seals, keys, rings, and
lockets,--that balanced her beautiful English watch. What a treasure
they would have been for a modern châtelaine! my father having
presented her with the newest, and an antique aunt having willed her
the rest. She was very much like an old picture of a young person
sitting there.

For my part, I was usually industrious enough, because I was never
persecuted with long tasks; my attention was never stretched, as it
were, upon a last, so that it was no meritorious achievement if I
could bend it towards all that I undertook, with a species of
elasticity peculiar to the nervous temperament. My mother was also
busy. She sat in her tall chair at the window, her eyes constantly
drawn towards the street, but she never left off working, being deep
in the knitting of an enormous black silk purse for Lydia to carry
when she went to market. Millicent was somewhere out of the room, and
Lydia, having given orders for dinner, had gone out to walk.

I had written about six lines in great trepidation--for writing
usually fevered me a little, it was such an effort--when my great
goose-quill slipped through my fingers, thin as they were, and I made
a desperate plunge into an O. I exclaimed aloud, "Oh, what a blot!"
and my lady Mentor arose and came behind me.

"Worse than a blot, Charles," she said, or something to that effect.
"A blot might not have been your fault, but the page is very badly
written; I shall cut it out, and you had better begin another."

"I shall only blot that, Clo," I answered; and Clo appealed to my
mother.

"It is very strange, is it not, that Charles, who is very attentive
generally, should be so little careful of his writing? He will never
suit the post of all others the most important he _should_ suit."

"What is that?" I inquired so sharply that my mother grew dignified,
and responded gravely,--

"My dear Clotilda, it will displease me very much if Charles does not
take pains in every point, as you are so kind as to instruct him. It
is but little such a young brother can do to show his gratitude."

"Mother!" I cried, and sliding out of my chair, I ran to hers. "I
shall never be able to write,--I mean neatly; Clo may look over me if
she likes, and she will know how hard I try."

"But do you never mean to write, Charles?"

"I shall get to write somehow, I suppose, but I shall never write what
you call a beautiful hand."

My mother took my fingers and laid them along her own, which were
scarcely larger.

"But your hands are very little less than mine; surely they can hold a
pen?"

"Oh, yes, I can hold anything!" And then I laughed and said, "I could
do something with my hands too." I was going to finish, "I could
play;" but Lydia had just turned the corner of the street, and my
mother's eyes were watching her up to the door. So I stood before her
without finishing my explanation. She at length said, kindly, "Well,
now go and write one charming copy, and then we will walk."

I ran back to my table and climbed my chair, Clo having faithfully
fulfilled her word and cut out the offending leaf.

But I had scarcely traced once, "Do not contradict your elders,"
before Lydia came in, flushed and glowing, with a basket upon her arm.
She exhibited the contents to my mother,--who, I suppose, approved
thereof, as she said they might be disposed of in the kitchen,--and
then, with a sort of sigh, began, before she left the room, to remove
her walking dress.

"Oh! it is hopeless; the present price is a guinea."

"I was fearful it would be so, my dear girl," replied my mother, in a
tone of mingled condolence and authority she was fond of assuming. "It
would be neither expedient nor fitting that I should allow you to go,
though I very much wish it; but should we suffer ourselves such an
indulgence, we should have to deprive ourselves of comforts that are
necessary to health, and thus to well being. I should not like dear
Millicent and yourself, young as you are, to go alone to the crowded
seats in the town-hall; and if I went with you, we should be three
guineas out of pocket for a month."

This was true; my mother's jointure was small, and though we lived in
ease, it was by the exercise of an economy rigidly enforced and
minutely developed. It was in my own place, indeed, I learned how
truly happy does comfort render home, and how strictly comfort may be
expressed by love from prudence, by charity from frugality, and by wit
from very slender competence.

"I do not complain, dear mother," Lydia resumed, in a livelier vein;
"I ventured to ask at the office because you gave me leave, and Fred
thought there would be back seats lowered in price, or perhaps a
standing gallery, as there was at the last festival. But it seems the
people in the gallery made so much uproar last time that the committee
have resolved to give it up."

This was getting away from the point, so I put in, "Is the festival to
be soon, then, Lydia?"

"Yes, dear; it is only three weeks to-day to the first performance."

"Will it be very grand?"

"Oh, yes; the finest and most complete we have ever had."

Then Lydia, having quite recovered her cheerfulness, went to the door,
and speedily was no more seen. No one spoke, and I went on with my
copy; but it was hard work for me to do so, for I was in a pricking
pulsation from head to foot. It must have been a physical prescience
of mental excitement, for I had scarcely ever felt so much before. I
was longing, nay, crazy, to finish my page, that I might run out and
find Millicent, who, child as I was, I knew could tell me what I
wanted to hear better than any one of them. My eagerness impeded me,
and I did not conclude it to Clo's genuine satisfaction after all. She
dotted all my i's and crossed my t's, though with a condescending
confession that I had taken pains,--and then I was suffered to go; but
it was walking time, and my mother dressed me herself in her room, so
I could not catch Millicent till we were fairly in the street.




CHAPTER III.


I do not pretend to remember all the conversations verbatim which I
have heard during my life, or in which I have taken a part; still,
there are many which I do remember word by word, and every word. My
conversation that morning with Millicent I do not remember,--its
results blotted it out forever; still, I am conscious it was an
exposition of energy and enthusiasm, for hers kindled as she replied
to my ardent inquiries, and, unknowingly, she inflamed my own. She
gave me a tale of the orchestra, its fulness and its potency; of the
five hundred voices, of the conductor, and of the assembly; she
assured me that nothing could be at all like it, that we had no idea
of its resources or its effects.

She was melancholy, evidently, at first, but quite lost in her
picturesque and passionate delineation, I all the while wondering how
she could endure to exist and not be going. I felt in myself that it
was not only a sorrow, but a shame, to live in the very place and not
press into the courts of music. I adored music even then,--ay! not
less than now, when I write with the strong heart and brain of
manhood. I thought how easily Millicent might do without a new hat, a
new cloak, or live on bread and water for a year. But I was man enough
even then, I am thankful to say, to recall almost on the instant that
Millicent was a woman, a very delicate girl, too, and that it would
never do for her to be crushed among hundreds of moving men and
women, nor for Fred to undertake the charge of more than one--he had
bought a ticket for his wife. Then I returned to myself.

From the first instant the slightest idea of the festival had been
presented to me, I had seized upon it personally with the most perfect
confidence. I had even determined how to go,--for go I felt I must;
and I knew if I could manage to procure a ticket, Fred would take me
in his hand, and my mother would allow me to be disposed of in the
shadow of his coat-tails, he was always so careful of us all. As I
walked homewards I fell silent, and with myself discussed my
arrangements; they were charming. The town-hall was not distant from
our house more than a quarter of a mile. I was often permitted to run
little errands for my sisters: to match a silk or to post a letter. My
pecuniary plan was unique: I was allowed twopence a week, to spend as
I would, though Clo protested I should keep an account-book as soon as
I had lived a dozen years. From my hatred of copper money I used to
change it into silver as fast as possible, and at present I had five
sixpences, and should have another by the end of another week. I was
to take this treasure to the ticket office, and request whatever
gentleman presided to let me have a ticket for my present deposit, and
trust--I felt a certain assurance that no one would refuse me, I know
not why, who had to do with the management of musical affairs. I was
to leave my sixpences with my name and address, and to call with
future allowances until I had refunded all. It struck me that not many
months must pass before this desirable end might accomplish itself.

I have often marvelled why I was not alarmed, nervous as I was, to
venture alone into such a place, with such a purpose; but I imagine I
was just too ignorant, too infantine in my notions of business. At all
events, I was more eager than anxious for the morrow, and only
restless from excited hope. I never manoeuvred before, I have often
manoeuvred since, but never quite so innocently, as I did to be sent
on an errand the next morning. It was very difficult, no one _would_
want anything, and at last in despair I dexterously carried away a
skein, or half a skein, of brown sewing silk, with which Lydia was
hemming two elegant gauze veils for herself and for Millicent. The
veils were to be worn that day I knew, for my mother had set her heart
upon their excluding a "thought" of east in the autumnal wind, and
there was no other silk; I managed to twist it into my shoe, and Lydia
looked everywhere for it, even into the pages of Clo's book,--greatly
to her discomfiture. But in vain, and at last said Lydia, "Here,
Charles, you must buy me another," handing me a penny. Poor Lydia! she
did not know how long it would be before I brought the silk; but
imagining I should be back _not_ directly, I had the decency to
transfer my pilfered skein to the under surface of the rug, for I knew
that they would turn it up as usual in a search. And then, without
having been observed to stoop, I fetched my beaver broad brimmer and
scampered out.

I scampered the whole way to the hall. It was a chilly day, but the
sun had acquired some power, and it was all summer in my veins. I
believe I had never been in such a state of ecstasy. I was quite
lightheaded, and madly expected to possess myself of a ticket
immediately, and dance home in triumph. The hall! how well I remember
it, looking very still, very cold, very blank; the windows all
shuttered, the doors all closed. But never mind; the walls were
glorious! They glittered with yellow placards, the black letters
about a yard long announcing the day, the hour, the force,--the
six-foot long list of wonders and worthies. I was something
disappointed not to find the ticket-office a Spanish castle suddenly
sprung from the stonework of the hall itself, but it was some comfort
that it was in St. Giles' Street, which was not far.

I scampered off again,--I tumbled down, having lost my breath, but I
sprang again to my feet; I saw a perfect encampment of placards, and I
rushed towards it. How like it was to a modern railway terminus, that
ticket-office!--in more senses than one, too. The door was not closed
here, but wide open to the street: within were green-baize doors
besides, but the outer entrance was crowded, and those were shut,--not
for a minute together, though, for I could not complain of quiet here.
Constantly some one hurrying past nearly upset me, bustling out or
pushing in. They were all men, it is true; but was I a girl? Besides,
I had seen a boy or two who had surveyed me impertinently, and whom I
took leave to stare down. A little while I stood in the entry,
bewildered, to collect my thoughts,--not my courage,--and then,
endeavoring to be all calmness and self-possession, I staggered in. I
then saw two enclosed niches, counter-like: the one had a huge
opening, and was crammed with people on this side; the other was
smaller, an air of eclecticism pervaded it; and behind each stood a
man. There was a staircase in front, and painted on the wall to its
left I read: "Committee-room upstairs; Balloted places,"--but then I
returned to my counters, and discovered, by reading also, that I must
present myself at the larger for unreserved central seats. It was
occupied so densely in front just now that it was hopeless to dream of
an approach or appeal; I could never scale that human wall. I
retreated again to the neighborhood of the smaller compartment, and
was fascinated to watch the swarming faces. Now a stream poured down
the staircase, all gentlemen, and most of them passed out, nodding and
laughing among themselves. Not all passed out. One or two strolled to
the inner doors and peeped through their glass halves, while others
gossiped in the entry. But one man came, and as I watched him, planted
himself against the counter I leaned upon,--the mart of the reserved
tickets. He did not buy any though, and I wondered why he did not, he
looked so easy, so at home there. Not that I saw his face, which was
turned from me; it struck me he was examining a clock there was up on
the staircase wall. I only noticed his boots, how bright they were,
and his speckled trousers, and that his hand, which hung down, was
very nicely covered with a doeskin glove.

Before he had made out the time, a number of the stones in the human
partition gave way at once,--in other words, I saw several chinks
between the loungers at the larger counter. I closer clasped my
sixpences, neatly folded in paper, and sped across the office. Now was
my hour. I was not quite so tall as to be able to look over and see
whom I addressed; nevertheless, I still spoke up.

I said, "If you please, sir, I wish to speak to you very particularly
about a ticket."

"Certainly," was the reply instantly thrown down upon me. "One guinea,
if you please."

"Sir, I wish to _speak_ about one, not to buy it just this minute; and
if you allow me to speak,"--I could not continue with the chance of
being heard, for two more stones had just thrust themselves in and hid
my chink; they nearly stifled me as it was, but I managed to escape,
and stood out clear behind. I stood out not to go, but to wait,
determined to apply again far more vigorously.

I listened to the rattling sovereigns as they dropped; and dearly I
longed for some of that money, though I never longed for money before
or since. Then suddenly reminded, I turned, to see whether that
noticeable personage had left the smaller counter. He was there. I
insensibly moved nearer to him,--so attractive was his presence. And
as I believe in various occult agencies and physical influences, I
hold myself to have been actually drawn towards him. He had a face
upon which it was life to look, so vivid was the intelligence it
radiated, so interesting was it in expression, and if not perfect, so
pure in outline. He was gazing at me too, and this, no doubt, called
out of me a glance all imploring, as so I felt, yea, even towards him,
for a spark of kindliest beam seemed to dart from under his strong
dark lashes, and his eyes woke up,--he even smiled just at the corners
of his small, but not thin lips. It was too much for me. I ran across,
and again took my stand beside him. I thought, and I still think, he
would have spoken to me instantly; but another man stepped up and
spoke to him. He replied in a voice I have always especially
affected,--calm, and very clear, but below tone in uttering remarks
not intended for the public. I did not hear a word. As soon as he
finished speaking, he turned and looked down upon me; and then he
said, "Can I do anything for you?"

I was so charmed with his frank address, I quite gasped for joy: "Sir,
I am waiting to speak to the man inside over there about my ticket."

"Shall I go across and get it?"

"Why, no, sir. I must speak to him--or if you would tell me about it."

"I will tell you anything; say on."

"Sir, I am very poor, and have not a guinea, but I shall have enough
in time, if you will let me buy one with the money I have brought, and
pay the rest by degrees."

I shall never forget the way he laid his hand on my shoulder and
turned me to the light,--to scrutinize my developments, I suspect; for
he stayed a moment or two before he answered, "I do think you look as
if you really wanted one, but I am afraid they will not understand
such an arrangement here."

"I _must_ go to the festival," I returned, looking into his eyes, "I
am so resolved to go; I will knock the door down if I cannot get a
ticket. Oh! I will sell my clothes, I will do anything. If you will
get me a ticket, sir, I will promise to pay you, and you can come and
ask my mother whether I ever break my word."

"I am sure you always keep it, or you would not love music so
earnestly; for you are very young to be so earnest," he responded,
still holding me by the arm, that thrilled beneath his kindly
pressure. "Will you go a little walk with me, and then I can better
understand you or what you want to do?"

"I won't go till I have got my ticket."

"You _cannot_ get a ticket, my poor boy; they are not so easily
disposed of. Why not ask your mother?"

"My sister as good as did; but my mother said it was too expensive."

"Did your mamma know how very much you wished it?"

"We do not say mamma, she does not like it; she likes 'liebe
Mutter.'"

"Ah! she is German. Perhaps she would allow you to go, if you told her
your great desire."

"No, sir; she told Lydia that it would put her out of pocket."

My new friend smiled at this.

"Now, just come outside; we are in the way of many people here, and I
have done my business since I saw that gentleman I was talking to when
you crept so near me."

"Did you know I wanted to come close to you, sir?"

"Oh, yes! and that you wanted to speak. I know the little violin
face."

These words transported me. "Oh! do you think I am like a violin? I
wish I were one going to the festival."

"Alas! in that sense you are not one, I fear."

I burst into tears; but I was very angry with myself, and noiselessly
put my whole face into my handkerchief as we moved to the door. Once
out in the street, the wind speedily dried these dews of my youth, and
I ventured to take my companion's hand. He glanced down at mine as it
passed itself into his, and I could see that he was examining it. I
had very pretty hands and nails,--they were my only handsome point; my
mother was very vain of them. I have found this out since I have grown
up.

"My dear little boy, I am going to do a very daring thing."

"What is that, sir?"

"I am going to run away with you; I am going to take you to my little
house, for I have thought of something I can only say to you in a
room. But if you will tell me your name, I will carry you safe home
afterwards, and explain everything to the 'liebe Mutter.'"

"Sir, I am so thankful to you that I cannot do enough to make you
believe it. I am Charles Auchester, and we live at No. 14 Herne
Street, at a red house with little windows and a great many steps up
to the door."

"I know the house, and have seen a beautiful Jewess at the window."

"Everybody says Millicent is like a Jewess. Sir, do you mind telling
me your name? I don't want to know it unless you like to tell it me."

"My name is not a very pretty one,--Lenhart Davy."[4]

"From David, I suppose?" I said, quickly. My friend looked at me very
keenly.

"You seem to think so at least."

"Yes, I thought you came from a Jew, like us,--partly, I mean.
Millicent says we ought to be very proud of it; and I think so too,
because it is so very ancient, and does not alter."

I perfectly well remember making this speech. Lenhart Davy laughed
quietly, but so heartily it was delightful to hear him.

"You are quite right about that. Come! will you trust me?"

"Oh! sir, I should like to go above all things, if it is not very
far,--I mean I must get back soon, or they will be frightened about
me."

"You _shall_ get back soon. I am afraid they are frightened now,--do
you think so? But my little house is on the way to yours, though you
would never find it out."

He paused, and we walked briskly forwards.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] Lenhart Davy is supposed by some to have been intended for
Ferdinand David, who was Mendelssohn's concert-meister at the
Gewandhaus in Leipsic and the teacher of Joachim and Wilhelmj. David
never was in England, however, and the resemblance is too remote to be
entertained.




CHAPTER IV.


Turning out of the market-place, a narrow street presented itself:
here were factories and the backs of houses. Again we threaded a
narrow turning: here was an outskirt of the town. It fronted a vast
green space; all building-ground enclosed this quiet corner, for only
a few small houses stood about. Here were no shops and no traffic. We
went on in all haste, and soon my guide arrested himself at a little
green gate. He unlatched it; we passed through into a tiny garden,
trim as tiny, pretty as trim, and enchantingly after my own way of
thinking. Never shall I forget its aspect,--the round bed in the
centre, edged with box as green as moss; the big rose-tree in the
middle of the bed, and lesser rose-trees round; the narrow gravel
walk, quite golden in the sun; the outer edge of box, and outer bed of
heaths and carnations and glowing purple stocks. But above all, the
giant hollyhocks, one on each side of a little brown door, whose
little latticed porch was arched with clematis, silvery as if
moonlight "Minatrost" were ever brooding upon that threshold.

I must not loiter here; it would have been difficult to loiter in
going about the garden, it was so unusually small, and the house, if
possible, was more diminutive. It had above the door two tiny casement
windows, only two; and as my guide opened the little door with a key
he brought out of his pocket, there was nothing to delay our entrance.
The passage was very narrow, but lightsome, for a door was open at
the end, peeping into a lawny kind of yard. No children were tumbling
about, nor was there any kitchen smell, but the rarest of all
essences, a just perceptible cleanliness,--not moisture, but
freshness.

We advanced to a staircase about three feet in width, uncarpeted, but
of a rich brown color, like chestnut skins; so also were the
balusters. About a dozen steps brought us to a proportionate
landing-place, and here I beheld two other little brown doors at
angles with one another. Lenhart Davy opened one of these, and led me
into a tiny room. Oh, what a tiny room! It was so tiny, so rare, so
curiously perfect that I could not help looking into it as I should
have done into a cabinet collection. The casements were uncurtained,
but a green silk shade, gathered at the top and bottom, was drawn
half-way along each. The walls were entirely books,--in fact, the
first thing I thought of was the book-houses I used to build of all
the odd volumes in our parlor closet during my quite incipient years.
But such books as adorned the sides of the little sanctum were more
suitable for walls than mine, in respect of size, being as they were,
or as far as I could see, all music-books, except in a stand between
the casements, where a few others rested one against another. There
was a soft gray drugget upon the floor; and though, of course, the
book-walls took up as much as half the room (a complete inner coat
they made for the outside shell), yet it did not strike me as poking,
because there was no heavy furniture, only a table, rather oval than
round, and four chairs; both chairs and table of the hue I had admired
upon the staircase,--a rich vegetable brown. On the table stood a
square inkstand of the same wood, and a little tray filled with such
odds as rubber, a penknife, sealing-wax, and a pencil. The wood of the
mantelshelf was the same tone, and so was that of a plain piano that
stood to the left of the fireplace, in the only nook that was not
books from floor to ceiling; but the books began again over the piano.
All this wood, so darkly striking the eye, had an indescribably
soothing effect (upon me I mean), and right glad was I to see Mr. Davy
seat himself upon a little brown bench before the piano and open it
carefully.

"Will you take off your hat for a minute or two, my dear boy?" he
asked, before he did anything else.

I laid the beaver upon the oval table.

"Now, tell me, can you sing at all?"

"Yes sir."

"From notes, or by ear?"

"A great deal by ear, but pretty well by notes."

"_From_ notes," he said, correctingly, and I laughed.

He then handed me a little book of chorales, which he fetched from
some out-of-the-way hole beneath the instrument. They were all German:
I knew some of them well enough.

"Oh, yes, I can sing these, I think."

"Try 'Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.'[5] Can you sing alto?"

"I always do. Millicent says it is proper for boys."

He just played the opening chord _slentando_, and I began. I was
perfectly comfortable, because I knew what I was about, and my voice,
as a child's, was perfect. I saw by his face that he was very much
surprised, as well as pleased. Then he left me alone to sing another,
and then a third; but at last he struck in with a bass,--the purest,
mellowest, and most unshaken I have ever heard, though not strong;
neither did he derange me by a florid accompaniment he made as we went
along. When I concluded the fourth, he turned, and took my hand in
his.

"I knew you could do something for music, but I had no idea it would
be so very sweetly. I believe you will go to the festival, after all.
You perceive I am very poor, or perhaps you do not perceive it, for
children see fairies in flies. But look round my little room. I have
nothing valuable except my books and my piano, and those I bought with
all the money I had several years ago. I dare say you think my house
is pretty. Well, it was just as bare as a barn when I came here six
months ago. I made the shelves (the houses for my precious books) of
deal, and I made that table, and the chairs, and this bench, of deal,
and stained each afterwards; I stained my shelves too, and my piano. I
only tell you this that you may understand how poor I am. I cannot
afford to give you one of these tickets, they are too dear, neither
have I one myself; but if your mother approves, and you like it, I
believe I can take you with me to sing in the chorus."

This was too much for me to bear without some strong expression or
other. I took my hat, hid my face in it, and then threw my arms round
Lenhart Davy's neck. He kissed me as a young father might have done,
with a sort of pride, and I was able to perceive he had taken an
instant fancy to me. I did not ask him whether he led the chorus, nor
what he had to do with it, nor what I should have to do; but I begged
him joyously to take me home directly. He tied on my hat himself, and
I scampered all the way downstairs and round the garden before he
came out of his shell. He soon followed after me, smiling; and though
he asked me no curious question as we went along, I could tell he was
nervous about something. We walked very fast, and in little less than
an hour from the time I left home, I stood again upon the threshold.

FOOTNOTE:

[5] Martin Luther's chorale, "A mighty fortress is our God."




CHAPTER V.


Of all the events of that market-day, none moved me more enjoyably
than the sight of the countenances, quite petrified with amazement, of
my friends in the parlor. They were my three sisters. Clo came forward
in her bonnet, all but ready for a sortie; and though she bowed
demurely enough, she began at me very gravely,--

"Charles, I was just about to set out and search for you. My mother
has already sent a servant. She herself is quite alarmed, and has gone
upstairs."

Before I could manage a reply, or introduce Lenhart Davy, he had drawn
out his card. He gave it to the "beautiful Jewess." Millicent took it
calmly, though she blushed, as she always did when face to face with
strangers, and she motioned him to the sofa. At this very instant my
mother opened the door.

It would not be possible for me to recover that conversation, but I
remember how very refined was the manner, and how amiably deferential
the explanation of my guide, as he brought out everything smooth and
apparent even to my mother's ken. Lydia almost laughed in his
presence, she was so pleased with him, and Millicent examined him
steadfastly with her usually shrinking gray eyes. My mother, I knew,
was displeased with me, but she even forgave me before he had done
speaking. His voice had in it a quality (if I may so name it) of
brightness,--a metallic purity when raised; and the heroic particles
in his blood seemed to start up and animate every gesture as he spoke.
To be more explicit as to my possibilities, he told us that he was in
fact a musical professor, though with little patronage in our town,
where he had only a few months settled; that for the most part he
taught, and preferred to teach, in classes, though he had but just
succeeded in organizing the first. That his residence and connection
in our town were authorized by his desire to discover the maximum
moral influence of music upon so many selected from the operative
ranks as should enable him by inference to judge of its moral power
over those same ranks in the aggregate. I learned this afterwards, of
course, as I could not apprehend it then; but I well recall that his
language, even at that time, bound me as by a spell of conviction, and
I even appreciated his philanthropy in exact proportion to his
personal gifts.

He said a great deal more, and considerably enlarged upon several
points of stirring musical interest, before he returned to the article
of the festival. Then he told us that his class would not form any
section of the chorus, being a private affair of his own, but that he
himself should sing among the basses, and that it being chiefly
amateur, any accumulation of the choral force was of consequence. He
glanced expressly at my mother when he said,--

"I think your little boy's voice and training would render him a very
valuable vote for the altos, and if you will permit me to take charge
of him at the rehearsals, and to exercise him once or twice alone, I
am certain Mr. St. Michel will receive him gladly."

"Is Mr. St. Michel the conductor, Mr. Davy, then?" replied my mother
with kindness. "I remember seeing him in Germany when a little
theatre was opened in our village. I was a girl then, and he very
young."

"Yes, madam. Application was made to the wonderful Milans-André, who
has been delighting Europe with his own compositions interpreted by
himself; but he could not visit England at present, so St. Michel will
be with us, as on former occasions. And he is a good conductor, very
steady, and understands rehearsal."

Let me here anticipate and obviate a question. Was not my mother
afraid to trust me in such a mixed multitude, with men and women her
inferiors in culture and position? My mother had never trusted me
before with a stranger, but I am certain, at this distance of time,
she could not resist the pure truthfulness and perfect breeding of
Lenhart Davy, and was forced into desiring such an acquaintance for
me. Perhaps, too, she was a little foolish over her last-born, for she
certainly did indulge me in a quiet way, and with a great show of
strictness.

As Lenhart Davy paused, she first thanked him, then rang the bell, was
silent until she had ordered refreshments, sat still even then a few
minutes, and presently uttered a deliberate consent. I could not bear
it. I stood on one foot for an instant behind Clo's chair, and then
flung myself into the passage. Once upstairs, I capered and danced
about my mother's bed-room until fairly exhausted, and then I lay down
on my own bed, positively in my coat and boots, and kicked the clothes
into a heap, until I cried. This brought me to, and I remembered with
awe the premises I had invaded. I darted to my feet, and was occupied
in restoring calm as far as possible to the tumbled coverlid, when I
was horrified at hearing a step. It was only Millicent, with tears in
her good eyes.

"I am so glad for you, Charles," she said; "I hope you will do
everything in your power to show how grateful you are."

"I will be grateful to everybody," I answered. "But do tell me, is he
gone?"

"Dear Charles, do not say '_he_' of such a man as Mr. Davy."

Now, Millicent was but seventeen; still, she had her ideas, girlishly
chaste and charming, of what men ought to be.

"I think he is lovely," I replied, dancing round and round her, till
she seized my hands.

"Yes, Mr. Davy is gone; but he is kindly coming to fetch you
to-morrow, to drink tea with him, and mother has asked him to dine
here on Sunday. He showed her a letter he has from the great John
Andernach, because mother said she knew him, and she says Mr. Davy
must be very good, as well as very clever, from what Mr. Andernach has
written."

"I know he is good! Think of his noticing _me_! I knew I should go! I
said I would go!" and I pulled my hands away to leap again.

The old windows rattled, the walls shook, and in came Clo.

"Charles, my mother says if you do not keep yourself still, she will
send a note after Mr. Davy. My dear boy, you must come and be put to
rights. How rough your head is! What have you been doing to make it
so?" and she marched me off. I was quelled directly, and it was indeed
very kind of them to scold me, or I should have ecstasized myself ill.

It was hard work to get through that day, I was so impatient for the
next; but Millicent took me to sing a little in the evening, and I
believe it sent me to sleep. I must mention that the festival was to
last three days. There were to be three grand morning performances and
three evening concerts; but my mother informed me she had said she did
not like my being out at night, and that Lenhart Davy had answered,
the evening concerts were not free of entrance to him, as there was to
be no chorus, so he could not take me. I did not care; for now a new
excitement, child of the first and very like its parent, sprang within
my breast. To sing myself,--it was something too grand; the veins
glowed in my temples as I thought of my voice, so small and thin,
swelling in the cloud of song to heaven: my side throbbed and
fluttered. To go was more than I dared to expect; but to be necessary
to go was more than I deserved,--it was glory.

I gathered a few very nice flowers to give Lenhart Davy, for we had a
pretty garden behind the house, and also a bit of a greenhouse, in
which Millicent kept our geraniums all the winter. She was tying up
the flowers for me with green silk when he knocked at the door, and
would not come in, but waited for me outside. Amiable readers,
everybody was old-fashioned twenty years ago,[6] and many somebodies
took tea at five o'clock. Admirable economy of social life, to eat
when you hunger, and to drink when you thirst! But it is polite to
invent an appetite for made-dishes, so we complain not that we dine at
eight nowadays; and it is politic too, for complexions are not what
they used to be, and maiden heiresses, with all their thousands,
cannot purchase Beauty Sleep! Pardon my digression while Davy is
waiting at the door. I did not keep him so long, be certain. We set
out. He was very much pleased with my flowers, and as it was rather a
chilly afternoon, he challenged me to a race. We ran together, he
striding after me like a child himself in play, and snapping at my
coat; I screamed all the while with exquisite sensation of pleasurable
fun. Then I sped away like a hound, and still again he caught me and
lifted me high into the air. Such buoyancy of spirits I never met
with, such fluency of attitude; I cannot call them or their effect
animal. It was rather as if the bright wit pervaded the bilious
temperament, almost misleading the physiologist to name it nervous. I
have never described Lenhart Davy, nor can I; but to use the keener
words of my friend Dumas, he was one of the men the most "significant"
I ever knew.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] This would make the romance open in the year 1833.




CHAPTER VI.


Arrived at his house,--that house, just what a house should be, to the
purpose in every respect,--I flew in as if quite at home. I was rather
amazed that I saw no woman-creature about, nor any kind of servant.
The door at the end of the passage was still open; I still saw out
into the little lawny yard, but nobody was stirring. "The house was
haunted!"

I believe it,--by a choir of glorious ghosts!

"Dear alto, you will not be alarmed to be locked in with me, I hope,
will you?"

"Frightened, sir? Oh, no, it is delicious." I most truly felt it
delicious. I preceded him up the staircase,--he remaining behind to
lock the little door. I most truly felt it delicious. Allow me again
to allude to the appetite. I was very hungry, and when I entered the
parlor I beheld such preparation upon the table as reminded me it is
at times satisfactory as well as necessary to eat and drink. The brown
inkstand and company were removed, and in their stead I saw a little
tray, of an oval form, upon which tray stood the most exquisite
porcelain service for two I have ever seen. The china was small and
very old,--I knew that, for we were rather curious in china at home;
and I saw how very valuable these cups, that cream-jug, those plates
must be. They were of pearly clearness, and the crimson and purple
butterfly on each rested over a sprig of honeysuckle entwined with
violets.

"Oh, what beautiful china!" I exclaimed; I could not help it, and
Lenhart Davy smiled.

"It was a present to me from my class in Germany."

"Did you have a class, sir, in Germany?"

"Only little boys, Charlie, like myself."

"Sir, did you teach when you were a little boy?"

"I began to teach before I was a great boy, but I taught only little
boys then."

He placed me in a chair while he left the room for an instant. I
suppose he entered the next, for I heard him close at hand. Coming
back quickly, he placed a little spirit-lamp upon the table, and a
little bright kettle over it; it boiled very soon. He made such
tea!--I shall never forget it; and when I told him I very seldom had
tea at home, he answered, "I seldom drink more than one cup myself;
but I think one cannot hurt even such a nervous person as you
are,--and besides, tea improves the voice,--did you know that?"

I laughed, and drew my chair close to his. Nor shall I ever forget the
tiny loaves, white and brown, nor the tiny pat of butter, nor the
thin, transparent biscuits, crisp as hoar-frost, and delicate as if
made of Israelitish manna. Davy ate not much himself, but he seemed
delighted to see me eat, nor would he allow me to talk.

"One never should," said he, "while eating."

Frugal as he was, he never for an instant lost his cheery smile and
companionable manner, and I observed he watched me very closely. As
soon as I had gathered up and put away my last crumb, I slipped out of
my chair, and pretended to pull him from his seat.

"Ah! you are right, we have much to do."

He went out again, and returned laden with a wooden tray, on which he
piled all the things and carried them downstairs. Returning, he
laughed and said,--

"I must be a little put out to-night, as I have a visitor, so I shall
not clear up until I have taken you home."

"My mother is going to send for me, sir; but I wish I might help you
now."

"I shall not need help,--I want it at least in another way. Will you
now come here?"

We removed to the piano. He took down from the shelves that
overshadowed it three or four volumes in succession. At length,
selecting one, he laid it upon the desk and opened it. I gazed in
admiration. It was a splendid edition, in score, of Pergolesi's
"Stabat Mater." He gathered from within its pages a separate
sheet--the alto part, beautifully copied--and handed it to me, saying,
"I know you will take care of it." So I did. We worked very hard, but
I think I never enjoyed any exercise so much. He premised, with a
cunning smile, that he should not let me run on at that rate if I had
not to be brushed up all in a hurry; but then, though I was ignorant,
I was apt and very ardent. I sang with an entire attention to his
hints; and though I felt I was hurrying on too fast for my
"understanding" to keep pace with my "spirit," yet I did get on very
rapidly in the mere accession to acquaintance with the part. We
literally rushed through the "Stabat Mater," which was for the first
part of the first grand morning, and then, for the other, we began the
"Dettingen Te Deum." I thought this very easy after the "Stabat
Mater," but Davy silenced me by suggesting, "You do not know the
difficulty until you are placed in the choir." Our evening's practice
lasted about two hours and a half. He stroked my hair gently then, and
said he feared he had fatigued me. I answered by thanking him with all
my might, and begging to go on. He shook his head.

"I am afraid we have done too much now. This day week the
'Creation,'--that is for the second morning; and then, Charles, then
the 'Messiah,'--last and best."

"Oh, the 'Messiah'! I know some of the songs,--at least, I have heard
them. And are we to hear that? and am I to sing in 'Hallelujah'?" I
had known of it from my cradle; and loving it _before_ I heard it, how
did I feel for it when it was to be brought so near me? I think that
this oratorio is the most beloved of any by children and child-like
souls. How strangely in it all spirits take a part!

Margareth, our ancient nurse, came for me at half-past eight. She was
not sent away, but Davy would accompany us to our own door. Before I
left his house, and while she was waiting in the parlor, he said to
me, "Would you like to see where I sleep?" and called me into the most
wonderful little room. A shower-bath filled one corner; there was a
great closet one whole side, filled with every necessary exactly
enough for one person. The bed was perfectly plain, with no curtains
and but a head-board, a mattress, looking as hard as the ground, and a
very singular portrait, over the head, of a gentleman, in
line-engraving, which does not intellectualize the contour. This
worthy wore a flowing wig and a shirt bedecked with frills.

"That is John Sebastian Bach," said Lenhart Davy,--"at least, they
told me so in Dresden. I keep it because it _means_ to be he."

"Ah!" I replied; for I had heard the jaw-breaking name, which is
dearer to many (though they, alas! too few, are scattered) than the
sound of Lydian measures.




CHAPTER VII.


If I permit myself to pay any more visits to the nameless cottage, I
shall never take myself to the festival; but I must just say that we
entertained Davy the next Sunday at dinner. I had never seen my mother
enjoy anybody's society so much; but I observed he talked not so much
as he listened to her, and this may have been the secret. He went very
early, but on the Tuesday he fetched me again. It was not in vain that
I sang this time either,--my voice seemed to deliver itself from
something earthly; it was joy and ease to pour it forth.

When we had blended the bass and alto of the "Creation" choruses, with
a long spell at "The heavens are telling," Davy observed, "Now for the
'Messiah,' but you will only be able to look at it with me; to-morrow
night is rehearsal at the hall, and your mother must let you go."
Rehearsal at the hall! What words were those? They rang in my brain
that night, and I began to grow very feverish. Millicent was very kind
to me; but I was quite timid of adverting to my auspices, and I dared
not introduce the subject, as none of them could feel as I did. My
mother watched me somewhat anxiously,--and no wonder; for I was very
much excited. But when the morrow came, my self-importance made a man
of me, and I was calmer than I had been for days.

I remember the knock which came about seven in the evening, just as it
was growing gray. I remember rushing from our parlor to Lenhart Davy
on the doorstep. I remember our walk, when my hands were so cold and
my heart was so hot, so happy. I remember the pale, pearly shade that
was falling on street and factory, the shop-lit glare, the mail-coach
thundering down High Street. I remember how I felt entering, from the
dim evening, the chiaro-oscuro of the corridors, just uncertainly
illustrated by a swinging lamp or two; and I remember passing into the
hall. Standing upon the orchestra, giddy, almost fearful to fall
forwards into the great unlighted chaos, the windows looked like
clouds themselves, and every pillar, tier, and cornice stood dilated
in the unsubstantial space. Lenhart Davy had to drag me forwards to my
nook among the altos, beneath the organ, just against the conductor's
desk. The orchestra was a dream to me, filled with dark shapes,
flitting and hurrying, crossed by wandering sounds, whispers, and
laughter. There must have been four or five hundred of us up there,
but it seems to me like a lampless church, as full as it could be of
people struggling for room.

Davy did not lose his hold upon me, but one and another addressed him,
and flying remarks reached him from every quarter. He answered in his
hilarious voice; but his manner was decidedly more distant than to me
when alone with him. At last some one appeared at the foot of the
orchestra steps with a taper; some one or other snatched it from him,
and in a moment a couple of candles beamed brightly from the
conductor's desk. It was a strange, candle-light effect then. Such
great, awful shadows threw themselves down the hall, and so many faces
seemed darker than they had, clustered in the glooming twilight.
Again some hidden hand had touched the gas, which burst in tongues of
splendor that shook themselves immediately over us; _then_ was the
orchestra a blaze defined as day. But still dark, and darkening, like
a vast abyss, lay the hall before us; and the great chandelier was
itself a blot, like a mystery hung in circumambient nothingness.

I was lost in the light around me, and striving to pierce into that
mystery beyond, when a whisper thrilled me: "Now, Charles, I must
leave you. You are Mr. Auchester at present. Stand firm and sing on.
Look alone at the conductor, and think alone of your part. Courage!"
What did he say "courage" for? As if my heart could fail me then and
there!

I looked steadfastly on. I saw the man of many years' service in the
cause of music looking fresh as any youth in the heyday of his primal
fancy. A white-haired man, with a patriarchal staff besides, which he
struck upon the desk for silence, and then raised, in calm, to dispel
the silence.

I can only say that my head swam for a few minutes, and I was obliged
to shut my eyes before I could tell whether I was singing or not. I
was very thankful when somebody somewhere got out as a fugue came in,
and we were stopped, because it gave me a breathing instant. But then
again, breathless,--nerveless, I might say, for I could not
distinguish my sensations,--we rushed on, or I did, it was all the
same; I was not myself yet. At length, indeed, it came, that restoring
sense of self which is so precious at some times of our life. I
recalled exactly where I was. I heard myself singing, felt myself
standing; I was as if treading upon air, yet fixed as rock. I arose
and fell upon those surges of sustaining sound; but it was as with an
undulating motion itself rest. My spirit straightway soared. I could
imagine my own voice, high above all the others, to ring as a lark's
above a forest, tuneful with a thousand tones more low, more hidden;
the attendant harmonies sank as it were beneath me; I swelled above
them. It was my first idea of paradise.

And it is perhaps my last.

Let me not prose where I should, most of all, be poetical. The
rehearsal was considered very successful. St. Michel praised us. He
was a good old man, and, as Davy had remarked, very steady. There was
a want of unction about his conducting, but I did not know it,
certainly not feel it, that night. The "Messiah" was more hurried
through than it should have been, because of the late hour, and also
because, as we were reminded, "it was the most generally known."
Besides, there was to be a full rehearsal with the band before the
festival, but I was not to be present, Davy considerately deeming the
full effect would be lost for me were it in any sense to be
anticipated.

I feel I should only fail if I should attempt to delineate my
sensations on the first two days of performance, for the single reason
that the third morning of that festival annihilated the others so
effectually as to render me only master at this moment of its
unparalleled incidents. _Those_ I bear on my heart and in my life even
to this very hour, and shall take them with me, yea, as a part of my
essential immortality.




CHAPTER VIII.


The second night I had not slept so well as the first, but on the
third morning I was, nathless, extraordinarily fresh. I seemed to have
lived ages, but yet all struck me in perfect unison as new. I was only
too intensely happy as I left our house with Davy, he having
breakfasted with us.

He was very much pleased with my achievements. I was very much pleased
with everything; I was saturated with pleasure. That day has lasted
me--a light--to this. Had I been stricken blind and deaf afterwards, I
ought not to have complained,--so far would my happiness, in degree
and nature, have outweighed any other I can imagine to have fallen to
any other lot. Let those who endure, who rejoice, alike pure in
passion, bless God for the power they possess--innate, unalienable,
intransferable--of suffering all they feel.

I shall never forget that scene. The hall was already crowded when we
pressed into our places half an hour before the appointed
commencement. Every central speck was a head; the walls were pillared
with human beings; the swarm increased, floating into the reserved
places, and a stream still poured on beneath the gallery.

As if to fling glory on music not of its own, it was a most splendid
day,--the finest, warmest, and serenest we had had for weeks. Through
the multitudinous panes the sky was a positive blaze of blue; the
sunshine fell upon the orchestra from the great arched window at the
end of the vaulted building, and through that window's purple and
orange border radiated gold and amethyst upon the countenances of the
entering crowd. The hands of the clock were at the quarter now; we in
the chorus wondered that St. Michel had not come. Again they moved,
those noiseless hands, and the "tongue" of iron told eleven. We all
grew anxious. Still, as all the clocks in the town were not alike, we
might be the mistaken ones by ours. It now struck eleven, though, from
the last church within our hearing, and there was not yet St. Michel.
We were all in the chorus fitted in so nicely that it would have been
difficult for some to get out, or if out, impossible to get in. They
were all in the orchestra placed as closely as possible, amidst a
perfect grove of music-stands. The reserved seats were full, the
organist was seated, the score lay wide open upon the lofty desk; but
St. Michel did not come!

I shall never forget how we wearied and wondered, and how I, at least,
racked myself, writhed, and agonized. The door beneath the orchestra
was shut, but every instant or two a hand turned the lock outside; one
agitated face peeped in, then another, but were immediately withdrawn.
I scarcely suppose the perfect silence lasted three minutes; it was
like an electrical suspension, and as quickly snapped. The surcharging
spleen of the audience began to break in a murmuring, humming, and
buzzing, from centre to gallery. The confusion of forms and faces
became a perfect dream, it dazzled me dizzy, and I felt quite sick. A
hundred fans began to ply in the reserved seats, the gentlemen bent
over the ladies; the sound gathered strength and portentous
significance from the non-explanatory calm of the orchestra force;
but all eyes were turned, all chins lengthened, towards the orchestra
door. At precisely a quarter past eleven the door opened wide, and up
came a gentleman in a white waistcoat. He stood somewhere in front,
but he could not get his voice out at first. Oh, the hisses then! the
shouts! the execrations! But it was a musical assembly, and a few
cries of "Shame!" hushed the storm sufficiently to give our curiosity
vent.

The speaker was a member of the committee, and very woebegone he
looked. He had to say (and it was of course his painful duty) that the
unprecedented delay in the commencement of the performance was
occasioned by an inevitable and most unexpected accident. Mr. St.
Michel, in riding from his house a few miles out, had been thrown from
his horse at the corner of the market-place, and falling on his right
arm, had broken it below the elbow.

The suddenness of the event would account for the delay sufficiently;
all means at present were being employed to secure the services of an
efficient resident professor, and it was trusted he would arrive
shortly. Otherwise, should there among the enlightened audience be
present any professor able and willing to undertake the responsible
office of conductor _pro tempore_, the committee would feel--A
hurricane of noes tore up the rest of the sentence in contempt, and
flung it in the face of the gentleman in the white waistcoat. He still
stood. It was well known that not a hand could be spared from the
orchestra; but of course a fancy instantly struck me of Lenhart Davy.
I looked up wistfully at him, among the basses, and endeavored to
persuade him with my eyes to come down. He smiled upon me, and his eye
was kindled; otherwise he seemed determined to remain as he was. Davy
was very proud, though one of the most modest men I ever knew.

A fresh volley of hisses broke from the very heart of the hall. Still,
it did not circulate, though the confusion seemed increasing in the
centre; and it was at that very instant--before poor Merlington had
left his apologetic stand--that a form, gliding light, as if of air,
appeared hovering on the steps at the side of the orchestra.

It was a man at least, if not a spirit; but I had not seen where that
gliding form came from, with its light and stealthy speed.

Swift as a beam of morning he sprang up the steps, and with one hand
upon the balustrade bowed to the audience. In a moment silence seemed
to mantle upon the hall.

He stood before the score, and as he closed upon the time-stick those
pointed fingers, he raised his eyes to the chorus, and then let them
fall upon the band. Those piercing eyes recalled us. Every hand was on
the bow, every mouthpiece lifted. There was still silence, but we
"heard" no "voice." He raised his thin arm: the overture began. The
curiosity of the audience had dilated with such intensity that all who
had been standing, still stood, and not a creature stirred. The calm
was perfect upon which the "Grave" broke. It was not interpretation
alone, it was inspiration. All knew that "Grave," but few had heard it
as it had been spoken that day. It was _then_ a heard voice,--"a voice
from heaven." There seemed not a string that was not touched by fire.

The tranquil echo of the repeat enabled me to bear it sufficiently to
look up and form some notion of him on whom so much depended. He was
slight, so slight that he seemed to have grown out of the air. He was
young, so young that he could not have numbered twenty summers; but
the heights of eternity were far-shadowed in the forehead's marble
dream.

A strange transparency took the place of bloom upon that face of
youth, as if from temperament too tender, or blood too rarefied; but
the hair betrayed a wondrous strength, clustering in dark curls of
excessive richness. The pointed fingers were pale, but they grasped
the time-stick with an energy like naked nerve.

But not until the violins woke up, announcing the subject of the
allegro, did I feel fully conscious of that countenance absolved from
its repose of perfection by an excitement itself divine.

It would exhaust thought no less than words to describe the aspect of
music, thus revealed, thus presented. I was a little child then, my
brain was unused to strong sensation, and I can only say I remembered
not how he looked after all was over. The intense impression
annihilated itself, as a white, dazzling fire struck from a smith's
anvil dies without ashy sign. I have since learned to discover, to
adore, every express lineament of that matchless face; but then I was
lost in gazing, in a spiritual, ebbless excitement,--then I was
conscious of the composition that he had made one with himself, that
became one with him.

The fire with which he led, the energy, the speed, could only have
been communicated to an English orchestra by such accurate force. The
perfection with which the conductor was endued must surely have passed
electrically into every player,--there fell not a note to the ground.
Such precision was wellnigh oppressive; one felt some hand must drop.

From beginning to end of the allegro not a disturbing sound arose
throughout the hall; but on the closing chord of the overture there
burst one deep toll of wonderful applause. I can only call it a
"toll;" it was simultaneous. The conductor looked over his shoulder,
and slightly shook his head. It was enough, and silence reigned as the
heavenly sympathy of the recitative trembled from the strings
surcharged with fire. Here it was as if he whispered "Hush!" for the
sobbing staccato of the accompaniment I never heard so low,--it was
silvery, almost awful. The bâton stirred languidly, as the stem of a
wind-swept lily, in those pointed fingers.

Nor would he suffer any violence to be done to the solemn brightness
of the aria. It was not until we all arose that he raised his arm, and
impetuously, almost imperiously, fixed upon us his eyes. He glanced
not _a moment_ at the score, he never turned a leaf, but he urged the
time majestically, and his rapturous beauty brightened as the voices
firmly, safely, swelled over the sustaining chords, launched in glory
upon those waves of sound.

I almost forgot the festival. I am not certain that I remember who I
was, or where I was, but I seemed to be singing at every pore. I
seemed pouring out my life instead of my voice; but the feeling I had
of being irresistibly borne along was so transporting that I can
conceive of nothing else like it, until after death.




CHAPTER IX.


The chorus, I learned afterwards, was never recalled, so proudly true,
so perfect, so flexible; but it was not only not difficult to keep in,
it was impossible to get out. So every one said among my choral
contemporaries afterwards.

I might recall how the arias told, invested with that same charm of
subdued and softened fulness; I might name each chorus, bent to such
strength by a might scarcely mortal: but I dare not anticipate my
after acquaintance with a musician who, himself supreme, has alone
known how to interpret the works of others. I will merely advert to
the extraordinary calm that pervaded the audience during the first
part.

Tremendous in revenge, perfectly tremendous, was the uproar between
the parts, for there was a pause and clearance for a quarter of an
hour. I could not have moved for some moments if I had wished it; as
it was, I was nearly pressed to death. Everybody was talking; a clamor
filled the air. I saw Lenhart Davy afar off, but he could not get to
me. He looked quite white, and his eyes sparkled. As for me, I could
not help thinking the world was coming to an end, so thirsty I felt,
so dry, so shaken from head to foot. I could scarcely feel the ground,
and I could not lift my knees, they were so stiff.

But still with infatuation I watched the conductor, though I suffered
not my eyes to wander to his face; I dared not look at him, I felt too
awful. He was suddenly surrounded by gentlemen, the members of the
committee. I knew they were there, bustling, skurrying, and I listened
to their intrusive tones. As the chorus pressed by me I was obliged to
advance a little, and I heard, in a quiet foreign accent, delicate as
clear, these words: "Nothing, thank you, but a glass of pure water."

Trembling, hot, and dizzy, almost mad with impatience, I pushed
through the crowd; it was rather thinner now, but I had to drive my
head against many a knot, and when I could not divide the groups I
dived underneath their arms. I cannot tell how I got out, but I
literally leaped the stairs; in two or three steps I cleared the
gallery. Once in the refreshment room, I snatched a glass jug that
stood in a pail filled with lumps of ice, and a tumbler, and made away
with them before the lady who was superintending that table had turned
her head. I had never a stumbling footstep, and though I sprang back
again, I did not spill a drop. I knew the hall was half empty, so
taking a short way that led me into it, I came to the bottom of the
orchestra. I stood the tumbler upon a form, and filling it to the
brim, left the beaker behind me and rushed up the orchestra stairs.

He was still there, leaning upon the score, with his hands upon his
face, and his eyes hidden. I advanced very quietly, but he heard me,
and without raising himself from the desk, let his hands fall,
elevated his countenance, and watched me as I approached him.

I trembled so violently then, taken with a fresh shudder of
excitement, that I could not lift the tumbler to present it. I saw a
person from the other side advancing with a tray, and dreading to be
supplanted, I looked up with desperate entreaty. The unknown
stretched his arm and raised the glass, taking it from me, to his
lips. Around those lips a shadowy half-smile was playing, but they
were white with fatigue or excitement, and he drank the water
instantly, as if athirst.

Then he returned to me the glass, empty, with a gentle but absent air,
paused one moment, and now, as if restored to himself, fully regarded
me, and fully smiled.

Down-gazing, those deep-colored eyes upon me seemed distant as the
stars of heaven; but there was an almost pitying sweetness in his tone
as he addressed me. I shall never forget that tone, nor how my eyelids
quivered with the longing want to weep.

"It was very refreshing," he said. "How much more strengthening is
water than wine! Thank you for the trouble you took to fetch it. And
you, you sang also in the chorus. It was beautifully done."

"May I tell them so, sir?" I asked him, eagerly, without being able to
help speaking in _some_ reply.

"Yes, every one; but above all, the little ones;" and again he faintly
smiled.

Then he turned to the score, and drooping over the desk, seemed to
pass back into himself, alone, by himself companioned. And in an agony
of fear lest I should intrude for a moment even, I sped as fast as I
had entered from his mysterious presence.

To this hour I cannot find in my memory the tone in which he spoke
that day. Though I have heard that voice so often since, have listened
to it in a trance of life, I can never realize _it_,--it was too
unearthly, and became part of what I shall be, having distilled from
the essence of my being, as I am.

Well, I came upon Lenhart Davy in one of the passages as I was running
back. I fell, in fact, against him, and he caught me in his arms.

"Charles Auchester, where have you been? You have frightened me
sorely. I thought I had lost you, I did indeed, and have been looking
for you ever since we came out of the hall."

As soon as I could collect enough of myself to put into words, I
exclaimed ecstatically, "Oh, Mr. Davy! I have been talking to the man
in the orchestra!"

"You have, indeed, you presumptuous atomy!" and he laughed in his own
way, adding, "I did not expect you would blow into an hero quite so
soon. And is our hero up there still? My dear Charles, you must have
been mistaken, he must be in the committee-room."

"No, I was not. The idea of my mistaking! as if anybody else could be
like him! He is up there now, and he would not come down, though they
asked him; and he said he would only drink a glass of water, and I
heard him, for I waited to see, and I fetched it, and he drank
it--there!" and I flung myself round Davy again, almost exhausted with
joy.

"And he spoke to you, did he, Charles? My own little boy, be still, or
I shall have to fetch _you_ a glass of water. I am really afraid of
all this excitement, for which you seem to come in naturally."

"So I do, Mr. Davy; but do tell me who is that man?"

"I cannot tell," said Davy, himself so flushed now that I could hardly
think him the same person, "unless, by some extraordinary chance, it
may be Milans-André."

"No, no!" exclaimed one of our contemporaries, who, in returning to
the orchestra, overheard the remark. "No, no! it is not Milans-André.
Mr. Hermann, the leader, has seen Milans-André in Paris. No, it is
some nobleman, they say,--a German prince. They all know Handel in
Germany."

"Nonsense!" replied Davy, "they don't know Handel better in Germany
than we do in England;" but he spoke as if to me, having turned from
the person who addressed him.

"Don't they, Mr. Davy? But he does look like a prince."

"Not a _German_ prince, my Charles. He is more like one of your
favorite Jews,--and that is where it is, no doubt."

"Davy, Davy!" exclaimed again another, one of the professors in the
town, "can it be Milans-André?"

"They say not, Mr. Westley. I do not know myself, but I should have
thought Monsieur André must be older than this gentleman, who does not
look twenty."

"Oh! he is more than twenty."

"As you please," muttered Davy, merrily, as he turned again to me. "My
boy, we must not stand here; we shall lose our old places. Do not
forget to remain in yours, when it is over, till I come to fetch you."

When it is over! Oh, cruel Lenhart Davy! to remind me that it would
ever end. I felt it cruel then, but perhaps I felt too much,--I always
do, and I hope I always shall.

Again marshalled in our places (I having crept to mine), and again
fitted in very tightly, we all arose. I suppose it was the oppression
of so many round me standing, superadded to the strong excitement, but
the whole time the chorus lasted, "Behold the Lamb of God!" I could
not sing. I stood and sobbed; but even then I had respect to Davy's
neatly copied alto sheet, and I only shaded my eyes with that, and
wept upon the floor. Nobody near observed me; they were all singing
with all their might; I alone dared to look down, ever down, and weep
upon the floor.

Such tears I never shed before; they were as necessary as dew after a
cloudless day, and, to pursue my figure, I awoke again at the
conclusion of the chorus to a deep, rapturous serenity, pure as
twilight, and gazed upwards at the stars, whose "smile was Paradise,"
with my heart again all voice.

I believe the chorus, "Lift up your heads!" will never again be heard
in England as it was heard then, and I am quite certain of the
"Hallelujah." It was as close, as clear, and the power that bound the
band alike constrained the chorus; both seemed freed from all
responsibility, and alone to depend upon the will that swayed, that
stirred, with a spell real as supernatural, and sweet as strange.

Perhaps the most immediate consequence of such faultless
interpretation was the remarkable stillness of the audience. Doubtless
a few there were who were calm in critical pique, but I believe the
majority dared not applaud, so decided had been the negative of that
graceful sign at the commencement of the performance; besides, a
breathless curiosity brooded, as distinctly to be traced in the
countenance of the crowd as in their thrilling quietude,--for
thrilling it was indeed, though not so thrilling as the outbreak, the
tempest out-rolling of pent-up satisfaction at the end of the final
chorus. That chorus (it was well indeed it was the last) seemed alone
to have exhausted the strength of the conductor; his arm suddenly
seemed to tire, he entirely relaxed, and the delicate but burning
hectic on each cheek alone remained, the seal of his celestial
passion.

He turned as soon as the applause, instead of decreasing, persisted;
for at first he had remained with his face towards the choir. As the
shouts still reached him, and the sea of heads began to fluctuate, he
bent a little in acknowledgment, but nevertheless preserved the same
air of indifference and abstraction from all about, beneath him.
Lingering only until the way was cleared below the orchestra steps, he
retreated down them even before the applause had ceased, and before
any one could approach him, without addressing any one, he left the
hall.

And of him nothing afterwards was heard,--I mean at that time. Not a
soul in the whole town had learned his name, and the hotel at which he
had slept the night before was in vain attacked by spies on every
errand. The landlord could only say what he knew himself,--that he was
a stranger who had visited the place for the purpose of attending the
festival, and who, having fulfilled that purpose, had left the city
unknown, unnamed, as he entered it.

I believe most children of my age would have had a fit of illness
after an excitement of brain and of body so peculiar; but perhaps had
I been less excited I should have been worse off afterwards. As it
was, the storm into which I had been wrought subsided of itself, and I
was the better for it,--just as Nature is said to be after her
disturbances of a similar description. Davy took me home, and then set
off to his own house, where he always seemed to have so much to do;
and all my people were very kind to me in listening, while I, more
calmly than any one would believe, expatiated upon our grand
adventure. I was extremely amused to see how astonished Clo was to
find me so reasonable; for her only fear had been, she informed my
mother, that Charles would not settle to anything for weeks if he were
allowed to go. And Millicent was very much astonished that I spoke so
little of the performance itself. I could only defend myself by
saying, "If you had seen him you would not wonder."

"Is he handsome, Charles?" said Lydia, innocently, with her brown eyes
fixed upon her thimble (which she held upon her finger, and was
shocked to perceive a little tarnished). I was so angry that I felt
myself turn quite sick; but I was good enough only to answer, "_You_
would not think so;" for so I believe. Millicent softly watched me,
and added, "Charlie means, I think, that it was a very beautiful
face."

"I do," I said bluntly; "I shall never see a beautiful face again. You
will never see one at all, as you have not seen _that_."

"Pity us then, Charles," replied Millicent, in her gentlest voice.

I climbed upon her lap. "Oh, no, dear! It is you who must pity me,
because you do not know what it is, and I do, and I have lost it."

Lydia lifted her eyes and made them very round; but as I was put to
bed directly, nobody heard any more of me that night.




CHAPTER X.


It was very strange, or rather it was just natural, that I should feel
so singularly low next day. I was not exactly tired, and I was not
exactly miserable. I was perfectly blank, like a sunless autumn day,
with no wind about. I lay very late in bed, and as I lay there I no
more believed the events of yesterday than if they had been a dream. I
was literally obliged to touch myself, my hair, my face, and the
bed-clothes before I could persuade myself that I was not myself a
dream. The cold bath restored me, into which I daily sprang, summer
and winter alike; but I grew worse again after breakfast.

Yearning to re-excite myself in some fashion, I marched into the
parlor and requested Clo to teach me as usual. There she was, in her
gray-silk gown, peering (with her short-sightedness) into Herodotus;
but though all my books were placed upon the table by her, I could
tell very easily that she had not expected me, and was very much
pleased I should come. Her approbation overcame me, and instead of
blotting my copy with ink, I used my tears. They were tears I could no
more have helped shedding than I could have helped breathing. Clo was
very kind, she looked at me solemnly, not severely, and solemnly
administered the consolation that they were the effect of excitement.
I did not think so; I thought they were the effect of a want of
excitement, but I said nothing to her.

I overcame them, and was quiet for the rest of the day, and for
several days; but imagine what I suffered when I saw no more of
Lenhart Davy. As the world in our house went on just the same as
before the festival, and as I had no hand in keeping the house so
charmingly, nor any part in committees for dinner, nor in pickling
speculations, I was fairly left to myself with my new discovery about
myself; namely, that I must be a musician, or I should perish.

Had I only seen Lenhart Davy, I could have told him all. I believe my
attraction towards him was irresistible, or I should never have
thought of him while he stayed away, it would have hurt me too much;
for I was painfully, may be vainly, sensitive. I was not able to
appreciate his delicacy of judgment, as well as feeling, in abstaining
from any further communication with us until we ourselves reminded him
of us. I had no hope; and the four or five days I have mentioned as
passing without his apparition seemed to annihilate my future. I quite
drooped, I could not help it; and my mother was evidently anxious. She
made me bring out my tongue a dozen times a day, and she continually
sighed, as if reproaching herself with something. How long it seemed!
quite four months, as I used to reckon. I never once alluded to
Lenhart Davy, but others did,--at least not Millicent, but Lydia and
my eldest sister. Lydia made the observation that perhaps he was too
modest to come without a special invitation; but Clo hurt me far more
by saying that he had no doubt better engagements elsewhere. On the
evening of the fifth day I was sitting upon the stool in the parlor by
the window, after tea, endeavoring to gather my wandering fancies to
"Simple Susan," her simple woes, pleasures, and loves (for Clo was
there, and I did not wish to be noticed), when Millicent came into
the room and said my mother wished to speak to me upstairs. I went out
with Millicent. "What does she want--I mean mother?" I inquired, no
doubt rather peevishly.

"She wants to ask you a question you will like to answer, Charles."

"Shall I?--what is it? I don't think I shall like to answer any
question. Oh, Millicent!" and I hid my small face in the folds of her
dark-blue frock.

"Come, Charles! you know I would not deceive you. Darling, you must
not feel so much."

And she stooped to kiss me, smiling, though the tears were in her
eyes. I still persisted in hiding my head, and when we reached the
door of the dressing-room, I went in crying. My mother sat in a great
white chair beside the fire; next her stood a small table covered with
hose,--the hose of the whole household.

"How, Charles! how now! Be a man, or at least a boy, or I am sure I
had better not ask you what I sent for you to answer. Come, say, would
you like to sing in Mr. Davy's class? You must not give up your old
lessons, nor must you forget to take great pains to write, to cipher,
and to read as well; but I think you are very fond of singing since
you found your voice, and Mr. Davy, to whom I wrote, says you can be
of use to him, and that he will be so very good as to teach you what
he teaches the others,--to understand what you sing."

Dear Millicent! I knew I owed it all to her, for there had been that
in her face, her manner, and her kind eyes that told me she had felt
for me in my desolation; and now as she stood apart from my mother and
me, I ran to her and told her so--that I knew it all. I will not dwell
upon the solicitude of Clo, lest I should become unmanageable in the
midst of my satisfaction, nor upon Lydia's amazement at my mother's
allowing me to join the class; but I well recollect how Millicent kept
fast by me, her will, as it were, upon mine, and her reminding
calmness ever possessing me, lest I should by my ecstatic behavior
forfeit my right to my new privileges. I was quite good enough,
though, in the general opinion, to be permitted to go, as arranged, on
the following Tuesday evening.

Lenhart Davy dined with us on Sunday, by special invitation, written
by my mother, conveyed by my Margareth. He told me that I must not
mistake his silence if he spoke not to me nor noticed me when he was
amidst his pupils. I perfectly understood even then how much depended
upon his sagacious self-dependence.

The class assembled from six till eight in the evening, twice a week;
the room Davy convoked it in was one he hired expressly. My mother
sent me with Margareth, who was to fetch me again at the expiration of
two hours,--at least during the winter, which was fast approaching.

And thus, had it not been for the festival, I should have been at once
initiated into "choral life."

Though, indeed, but for that glorious time, and my own fantastic
courage, first-fruit of a musical temperament, I had perhaps never
been taught to give that name where I can now bestow none other, so
completely has choral worship passed into my life.

When Margareth left me at the door of a house I had never
entered,--though I knew it well, for it was let out in auction-rooms,
for committees and the like,--I felt far more wild and lost than when
I attended the grand rehearsal hand in hand with Lenhart Davy. He was
my master, though,--I remembered this, and also that he expected a
great deal of me, for he had told me so, and that he had appointed me
a high place among the altos. I had my numbered ticket in my hand, and
upon it my name, and I showed it to a man who was standing above at
the top of the steep staircase. He looked at it, nodded, and pushed me
in.

The room was tolerably large and high, and lighted by gas-burners,
which fully illustrated the bareness of wall and floor and ceiling.
Accustomed to carpets in every chamber, nay, in every passage, I was
horrified to hear my own footfall upon the boards as I traversed the
backs of those raised forms, one above the other, full of people. Boys
and men, and women and girls, seemed all mixed up together, and all
watching me; for I was late, and quite dreamy with walking through the
twilight town. Several beckoning hands were raised as I inquired for
the place of the altos, and I took my seat just where a number, nailed
to the form, answered to the number on my ticket.




CHAPTER XI.


I was too satisfied to have found my way safely in, and too glad to
feel deposited somewhere, to gaze round me just then; but a door
opened with a creaking hinge on the ground floor below, and as perfect
in my eyes as ever, stepped forth Lenhart Davy and bowed to his whole
class. He carried a little time-stick in his hands, but nothing else;
and as he placed himself in front, immediately beneath the lowest
form, I was conscious, though I believe no one else present could be,
of the powerful control he had placed as a barrier between himself and
those before him,--between his active and his passive being.

He began to address us in his fine, easy tones, in language pure
enough for the proudest intellect, sufficiently simple for the least
cultured ear; and he spoke chiefly of what he had said the time
before, recapitulating, and pausing to receive questions or to elicit
answers. But all he said, whatever it was to others, was to me a
highly spiritual analysis of what most teachers endeavor to lower and
to explain away,--the mystery and integrity of the musical art.

He touched very lightly upon theory, but expounded sounds by signs in
a manner of his own, which it is not necessary to communicate, as its
results were those of no system whatever, but was applied by wisdom,
and enforced by gradual acquaintance.

We did not begin to sing for at least half an hour; but he then
unlocked a huge closet, drew forth an enormous board, and mapped
thereon in white chalk the exercises of his own preparation for our
evening's practice. These were pure, were simple, as his introductory
address.

As I have said, the class was only just organized, but it was not a
very small one; there must have been sixty or seventy present that
night. I was in the topmost row of altos, and as soon as we began to
sing I was irresistibly attracted to those about me; and to identify
them with their voices was for me a singular fascination. I was but
the fourth from the wall on my side, and a burner was directly above
me. I took advantage of the light to criticise the countenances of my
nearer contemporaries, who were all absorbed in watching our master's
evolutions. I could not look at him until I had acquainted myself with
my locality, as far as I could without staring, or being stared at.
Next the wall, two boys (so alike that they could only have been
brothers) nestled and bawled; they were dark-hued, yet sallow, and not
inviting. I concluded they came from some factory, and so they did;
but they did not please me enough to detain my attention,--they were
beneath my own grade. So was a little girl nearest to them and next to
me, but I could not help regarding her. She had the most imperturbable
gaze I ever met,--great eyes of a yellow hazel, with no more
expression in them than water; but her cheeks were brightly colored,
and her long auburn hair was curled to her waist.

An ease pervaded her that was more than elegance. She leaned and she
lounged, singing in a flexible voice, without the slightest effort,
and as carelessly as she looked. She wore a pink gingham frock, ill
made to a degree, but her slender figure moved in and out of it like a
reed; her hands were fitted into discolored light kid gloves, and she
had on an amber necklace. This alone would have disgusted me, if she
had not looked so unconcerned, so strange, and if I had not thought
her hair so very pretty; but I did, and, as I have said, I could not
avoid regarding her. She had her bonnet in her lap (a bruised muslin
one, with tumbled satin strings); and I was surveying it rather
closely, when she turned upon me and whispered loud, not low (and then
went on singing herself, instantly), "Why don't you sing?" Scared and
shocked, I drew myself away from her as far as possible, and moved my
eyes to my other neighbor. It was a girl too; but I instantly felt the
words "young lady" to be appropriate, though I knew not wherefore,
except that she was, as it were, so perfectly self-possessed. She must
be older than I am (it occurred to me), but I could not tell how much.
She was, in fact, about fourteen.

It was some relief to look upon her, after being attacked by the quick
little being on my right hand, because she seemed as utterly
indisposed to address me as the other had been determined. She did not
seem even to see me, nor give the least glance at anybody or anything,
except Lenhart Davy and his board. Upon them she fastened her whole
expression, and she sang with assiduous calmness. So, though I sang
too, fearing my friend would observe my silence, I turned quite
towards my young lady and watched her intensely,--she noticing me no
more than she would have noticed a fly walking upon the wall, or upon
Lenhart Davy's board. I was very fastidious then, whatever I may be
now, and I seldom gazed upon a face for the pleasure of seeing it. In
this instance I experienced a feeling beyond pleasure, so exquisitely
did the countenance beside me harmonize with something in myself. Not
strictly fine, nor severely perfect in outline or of hue, this sweet
face shone in glory not its own,--the most ardent musical intention
lay upon the eyes, the lips, the brow; and the deep lashes themselves
seemed born to shade from too much brightness a beholder like myself.

I thought her a young woman, and so she was, compared with my age, at
least; but my awe and her exaltation were measured by a distant
self-possession towards me, towards all. She was not dressed with much
more costliness than my wild little rebuker; but her plain black frock
fitted her beautifully, and her dark gloves, and the dark ribbon on
her hat, and her little round muff, satisfied me as to her gentle and
her womanly pretensions.

In linking these adjectives, you will realize one of my infatuations
wherever they are substantively found. Enough. I dared not leave off
singing, and my voice was rather strong, so I could not clearly decide
upon hers, until Davy wrote up a few intervals for unisons, which very
few of us achieved on the instant. My calm companion was among those
who did. Her voice was more touching than any I had ever heard, and a
true contralto; only more soft than deep, more distilling than low.
But unknowing as I was, I was certain she had sung, and had learned to
sing, long before she had joined the class; for in her singing there
was that purified quality which reminds one (it did me) of filtered
water, and she pronounced most skilfully the varied vocables. I felt
afterwards that she must have been annoyed at my pertinacious
scrutiny, but she betrayed not the remotest cognizance of me or my
regards; and this indifference compelled me to watch her far more than
sympathetic behavior would have done. That evening seemed long to me
while we were at work, but I could not bear the breaking-up. I had
become, as it were, connected with my companions, though we had not
exchanged a word. I was rather disposed to wait and see who would join
my little girl with her wild eyes, and my serene young lady. I believe
I should have done so, but Lenhart Davy kindly came up from below and
shook hands with me; and while I was receiving and returning his
greeting, they were lost in the general crowd.

He took me himself down stairs to Margareth, who was awaiting me with
a cloak and a comforter in a little unfurnished room; and then he
himself departed, looking very tired.




CHAPTER XII.


I did not see him again until the next class-night. It was strange to
find the same faces about me; and above all, my two heroines, dressed
exactly as on the first occasion, except that the pink frock was
rather less brilliant. I listened eagerly for those pure tones to
swell, communing with my own, and I was not disappointed. We did not
sing anything that I can specify at present; but it was more than
pleasure--it was vitality--to me to fling out my own buoyant notes far
and wide, supported, as it were, by an atmosphere of commingling
sounds. I suppose, therefore, that I may have been singing very loud
when the daring little head out of the muslin bonnet put itself into
my face and chanted, in strict attention to Davy's rules all the time,
"How beautifully you do sing!" I was hushed for the moment, and should
have been vexed if I had not been frightened; for I was ridiculously
timorous as a child.

She then brought from the crown of her bonnet a paper full of bonbons,
which she opened and presented to me. I replied very sharply, in a low
voice, "I don't eat while I am singing," and should have taken no more
notice of her; but she now raised upon me her large eyes to the full,
and still pushed the bonbon paper at me,--almost in my face too. I was
too well bred to push it away, but too honest not to say, when she
still persisted in offering the saccharine conglomeration, "I don't
like curl papers." The child turned from me with a fierce gesture,
but her eyes were now swimming in tears. I was astonished, angry,
melted. I at length reproached myself; and though I could not bring
myself to touch the colored chocolates, crumbled up as they had been
in her hand, I did condescend to whisper, "Never mind!" and she took
out her handkerchief to wipe her eyes.

Now, all this while my young lady took no heed, and I felt almost sure
she must have noticed us; but she did not turn to the large-eyed
maiden, and _I_ occupied myself with both. That night again Davy
joined me, and I only managed to catch a glimpse of the muslin
bonneted, holding her bonbons still in one dirty glove, and with the
other taking the hand of a huge, high-shouldered man, going out with
the crowd.

Oh, Davy was too deep for me, and delicate as deep! The next night of
our meeting my number was moved to the other side of my serene
neighbor, who at present divided me from the hazel eyes and the
ringlets. It never occurred to me that _he_ had done it; I thought it
to be a mistake, and fully intended, like a curious manikin, to go
back another time to my old quarters. I could not help looking at the
little one to see whether I was watched. But no; with a coquetry I was
too young to appreciate, and she ought to have been too young to
exercise, she sang with all her might, never once turning her eyes
towards me. I found at length the fascinations of our choral force too
strong not to submerge her slight individuality, and soon I forgot she
was there,--though I never forgot that serene voice breathing by my
side faint prophecies I could not render to myself in any form, except
that they had to do with myself, and with music alike my very own. I
do not think any musical taste was ever fed and fostered early in an
atmosphere so pure as mine; for Lenhart Davy's class, when fully
organized and entirely submitted to him, seemed invested with his own
double peculiarity,--subdued, yet strong. We were initiated this
evening into an ancient anthem, whose effect, when it was permitted to
us to interpret, was such that I could not repress my satisfaction,
and I said aloud, though I did not confront my companion, "That is
something like!" My serene contralto answered, strangely to my
anticipations, and with the superior womanliness I have ascribed to
her, "Is it not glorious?"

It was an anthem in the severe style, that tells so powerfully in
four-voiced harmony; and the parts were copied upon gigantic tablets
in front, against the wall that was Davy's background.

"I cannot see," said the other little creature, pulling the
contralto's black-silk gown.

"I am sorry for you," replied the other, "but I believe that you can
see, Laura, as well as I can; you mean you will not trouble yourself,
or that you are idle to-night."

"And what if I do? I hate those horrid hymn sort of tunes; they will
not be of any use to me."

"Silence!" uttered the voice of Lenhart Davy. There was seldom
occasion for him to say so, but just now there had been a pause before
we repeated the first movement of the anthem.

He told me he had a little leisure that evening, and would take me
home. I was enchanted, and fully meant to ask him to come in with me;
but I actually forgot it until after he had turned away. Margareth
reproved me very seriously; "Your sisters would have asked him in,
Master Charles, to supper." But the fact was, I had been occupied with
my own world too much. I had said to him directly we were in the
street, "Dear Mr. Davy, who are those two girls whose seats are the
nearest to mine?"

"They belong to the class like yourself, as you perceive, but they are
not persons you would be likely to meet anywhere else."

"Why not, sir? I should like to be friends with all the singers."

Davy smiled. "So you may be, in singing, and, I hope, will be; but
they are not all companions for you _out_ of the class. You know that
very well."

"I suppose, sir, you mean that some are poorer than we are, some not
so well brought up, some too old, and all that?"

"I did, certainly; but not only so. You had better not make too many
friends at your time of life,--rather too few than too many. Ask your
mother if I am not correct. You see, she has a right to expect that
you should love home best at present."

"I always should love _home_ best," I answered quickly; and I remember
well how Davy sighed.

"You mean what even every boy must feel, that you should like to make
a home for yourself; but the reward is after the race,--the victory at
the end of the struggle."

It appeared to me very readily that he here addressed something in his
own soul; for his voice had fallen. I urged, "I know it, sir; but do
tell me the names of those two girls,--I won't let them know you told
me."

He laughed long and heartily. "Oh! yes, willingly; you would soon have
heard their names, though. The little one is Laura Lemark, the child
of a person who has a great deal to do with the theatres in this town,
and she is training for a dancer, besides being already a singer in
the chorus at a certain theatre. Your mother would not like you to
visit her, you may be sure; and therefore you should not try to know
her. I placed you near her because she is the most knowing of all my
pupils, except Miss Benette,[7] the young person who sat next you this
evening."

"With the lovely voice? Oh! I should never know _her_ if I wished it."

"You need not wish it; but even if you did, she would never become
troublesome in any respect. She is too calm, too modest."

"And pray, tell me, sir, is she to be a dancer too?"

"No, oh, no! She will decidedly become one of the finest singers in
England, but I believe she will not go upon the stage."

"You call the theatre the stage, sir, don't you?"

"Yes, in this instance."

"But why won't she go upon the stage? Cannot she act?"

"She does not think she is called to it by any special gift."

"Did she say those words, sir?"

"Those very words."

"I thought she would just say them, sir. Does she know you very well?"

"She is my own pupil."

"Oh! out of the class, sir, I suppose?"

"Yes, I teach her in my house."

"Sir, I wish you taught me in your house."

"I should say, too, that I wished it," answered Davy, sweetly; "but
you have a sister to teach you at home, and Clara Benette has no one."

"I should like to have no one--to teach me, I mean,--if you would
teach me. If my mother said yes, would you, sir?"

"For a little while I would with pleasure."

"Why not long, sir? I mean, why only for a little while?"

"Because there are others of whom you ought to learn, and _will_
learn, I am persuaded," he added, almost dreamingly, as he turned me
to the moonlight, now overspread about us, and surveyed me seriously.
"The little violin-face,--you know, Charles, I cannot be mistaken in
those lines."

"I would rather sing, sir."

"Ah! that is because you have not tried anything else."

"But, sir, _you_ sing."

"I suppose that I must say, as Miss Benette does, 'I have a special
gift' that way," replied Davy, laughing.

"You have a special gift all the ways, I think, sir," I cried as I ran
into our house. I told Millicent all he had said, except that Laura
was to be a dancer; and yet I cannot tell why I left this out, for
there was that about her fairly repelling me, and at the same time I
felt as if exposed to some power through her, and could not restrain
myself from a desire to see her again. Millicent told my mother all
that I had said to _her_ the next morning at breakfast. My mother, who
had as much worldliness as any of us, and that was just none, was
mightily amused at my new interests. She could not make up her mind
about the private lessons yet; she thought me too young, and that I
had plenty of time before me,--at present the class was sufficient
excitement, and gave me enough to do. Clo quite coincided here; she,
if anything, thought it rather too much already, though a very good
thing indeed.

FOOTNOTE:

[7] Clara Benette, who plays such an important part in this romance,
has been generally accepted as a sketch of Jenny Lind. The
resemblances are not very close, however. At the time of the opening
of the story she had not made her _début_, and she did not appear in
England until 1847, the year of Mendelssohn's death. It is true,
however, that she was an intimate friend of the composer and followed
his advice explicitly, and that he was largely instrumental in
introducing her to the English public. She also founded a musical
scholarship in London in his memory.




CHAPTER XIII.


Next time we met we began the anthem after our first exercise.
Laura[8]--by this time she was always Laura in my own world--nodded at
me. She had on a green silk frock to-night; and surely no color could
have so enhanced the clarified brightness of her strange eyes. Davy
was pleased with us, but not with our enunciation of certain
syllables. He requested us as a favor to practise between that meeting
and the next. There were a great many assents, and Laura was very open
in her "yes." Miss Benette whispered to herself, "Of course." And I,
unable to resist the opportunity, whispered to her, "Does he mean that
we are to practise alone, or one by one?"

"Mr. Davy will lend us our parts, and I daresay will copy them on
purpose," she replied. "It will be better to practise alone, or at
least one or two together, than a great many, or even a few. We can
more easily detect our faults."

"How well she speaks!" I thought,--"quite as prettily as Millicent;
her accent is very good, I am sure;" and I again addressed her. "I do
not think you have any faults at all,--your voice seems able to do
anything."

"I do nothing at all with it, it seems to me, and that I have very
little voice at present. I think we had better not talk, because it
seems so careless."

"Talk to me," broke in Laura from beyond Miss Benette; but I would
not,--I steadily looked in front, full of a new plan of mine. I must
explain that we proceeded slowly, because Davy's instructions were
complete,--perhaps too ideal for the majority; but for some and for me
there was an ineffaceable conviction in every novel utterance.

Just before we separated, I ventured to make my request. "Miss
Benette!" I said, and she almost stared, quite started to find I knew
her name, "Mr. Davy told me who you were,--will you let me come and
practise with you? He will tell you my name if you must know it, but I
should so like to sing with you,--I do so admire your voice." I spoke
with the most perfect innocence, at the same time quite madly wishing
to know her; I did not mean to be overheard, but on the instant Laura
looked over.

"You don't ask _me_."

"Because I don't care about your voice," I answered, bluntly. She
again gazed at me brightly, her eyes swimming.

"Oh, hush!" whispered Miss Benette; "you have hurt her, poor little
thing."

"How very good you are!" I returned, scarcely knowing what to say. "I
always speak the truth."

"Yes, I should think so; but it is not good taste to dislike Laura's
voice, for it is very pretty."

"Come, Miss Benette, do make haste and tell me whether you will let me
sing with you to-morrow."

"I do not mind if your friends will not object."

"Tell me where you live, then."

"In St. Anthony's Lane, just by the new foundation. There is a tree in
front, but no garden. You must not come, if you please, until after
one o'clock, because I have to practise for my other lessons."

"Good-night."

She ran off, having bowed a little courtesy. Laura had left while we
were talking.

"Now," thought I, "I shall have it all out, who she is and what she
does, and I will make Millicent go to see her." Davy here joined me.

"So you have made friends with Miss Benette."

"Yes, sir;" but I did not tell him I was going to practise with her,
for fear anything should prevent my going.

"She is an excellent young person, and will be a true artist.
Nevertheless, remember my injunction,--rather too few friends than too
many."

"I mean to keep friends with her, and to make my sister friends with
her."

"Your sister does not want friends, I should think."

"Oh, sir, did you ever find out who the conductor was?"

"Nobody knows. It is very singular," and he raised his voice, "that he
has never been heard of since, and had not been seen before by anybody
present, though so many foreign professors were in the hall. In London
they persist it was Milans-André, though André has himself
contradicted the assertion."

"I should like to hear Milans-André."

"You will some day, no doubt."

"Do you think I shall?"

"I feel in myself quite sure. Now, good-night to you."

"Do come in, sir, and have some supper, please."

But Davy was off in the moonlight before the door could be opened into
our house.

When I told Millicent I was going to practise with one of the class,
she thought fit to tell my mother. My mother made various inquiries;
but I satisfied her by assuring her it was one of Davy's own pupils,
and his favorite, and I contrived not to be asked whether it was a
young lady,--I let them think just at that time it was a young
gentleman about my own standing. The only direct injunction laid upon
me was that I should be home for tea at five o'clock,--and as I did
not leave our house until after our one o'clock dinner, this did not
give me very much time; but I ran the whole way.

I forgot to mention that Davy had lent each of us our parts
beautifully copied,--at least he had lent them to all who engaged to
practise, and I was one. I had rolled it up very neatly.

I soon found the house, but I was certainly astonished when I did find
it. I could not believe such a creature as Miss Benette could remain,
so bright, buried down there. It was the last house of a very dull
row, all let out in lodgings,--the meanest in the town except the very
poor.

It was no absurd notion of relative inferiority with which I surveyed
it, I was pained at the positive fact that the person to whom I had
taken such a fancy should be obliged to remain where I felt as if I
should never be able to breathe. I lingered but a moment though, and
then I touched a little heavy, distorted knocker that hung nearly at
the bottom of the door,--how unlike, I thought, to Lenhart Davy's tiny
castle under lock and key! Presently the door was opened by a person,
the like of whom I had never seen in all my small experience,--a
universal servant, required to be ubiquitous; let this description
suffice. I asked for Miss Benette. "The first door to the right,
upstairs," was the reply; and passing along a dark entry, I began to
ascend them, steep and carpetless. I seemed, however, to revive when I
perceived how lately the wooden steps had been washed; there was not a
foot-mark all the way up to the top, and they smelt of soap and water.

I found several doors to embarrass me on the landing, all painted
black; but I heard tones in one direction that decided me to knock. A
voice as soft as Millicent's responded, "Come in."

Oh, how strange I felt when I entered! to the full as strange as when
I first saw Davy's sanctum. No less a sanctum this, I remember
thinking, to the eyes that behold the pure in heart. It was so
exquisitely tidy, I felt at once that my selfish sensibilities had
nothing to fear. The room was indeed small, but no book walls darkened
gloriously the daylight; the fireplace was hideous, the carpet coarse
and glaring, the paper was crude green,--I hate crude greens more than
yellow blues,--and the chairs were rush-bottomed, every one. But she
for whom I came was seated at the window, singing; she held some piece
of work in her hand, which she laid upon the table when I entered.
Pardon my reverting to the table; I could not keep my eyes from it. It
was covered with specimens of work,--such work as I had never seen, as
I shall never see again, though all my sisters could embroider, could
stitch, could sew with the very best. She did not like me to look at
it though, I thought, for she drew me to the window by showing me a
chair she had set for me close beside her own. The only luxury amidst
the furniture was a mahogany music-stand, which was placed before our
two seats. One part lay upon the stand, but it was not in Lenhart
Davy's autography.

"Did you copy that part yourself, Miss Benette?" said I, unable to
restrain the question.

"Yes; I thought it too much that Mr. Davy should copy all the parts
himself for us."

"Does he?"

"Oh, yes; did you not know it? But we must not talk, we must work. Let
us be very careful."

"You show me how; please to sing it once alone."

She struck the tuning-fork upon the desk, and without the slightest
hesitation, flush, or effort, she began. One would not have deemed it
an incomplete fragment of score; it resounded in my very brain like
perfect harmony, so strangely did my own ear infer the intermediate
sounds.

"Oh, how lovely! how exquisite it must be to feel you can do so much!"
I exclaimed, as her unfaltering accent thrilled the last amen.

"I seem never to have done anything, as I told you before; it is
necessary to do _so_ much. Now sing it alone once all through, and I
will correct you as Mr. Davy corrects me."

I complied instantly, feeling her very presence would be instruction,
forgetting, or not conscious, how young she was. She corrected me a
great deal, though with the utmost simplicity. I was astonished at the
depth of her remarks, though too ignorant to conceive that they broke
as mere ripples from the soundless deeps of genius. Then we sang
together, and she wandered into the soprano part. I was transported; I
was eager to retain her good opinion, and took immense pains. But it
never struck me all the time that it was strange she should be
alone,--apparently alone, I mean. I was too purely happy in her
society. She sat as serenely as at the class, and criticised as
severely as our master.

"It is getting late," she said at last, "and I think you had better
go. Besides, I must go on with my work. If you are so kind as to come
and practise with me again, I must work while I sing, as I do when I
am alone."

"Oh, why did you not to-day?"

"I thought it would not be polite the first time," answered she, as
gravely as a judge; and I never felt so delighted with anything in all
my life. I looked up at her eyes, but the lashes were so long I could
not see them, for _she_ was looking down.

"Will you think me rude if I ask to look at your work?"

"You may look at what I am going to send to the shop."

"Oh, what shop?"

She got out of her chair and moved to the table. There was no smile
upon her baby-mouth. She pointed to the articles I had noticed but had
not dared to examine. They were, indeed, sights to see, one and all.
Such delicate frock-bodies and sprigged caps for infants; such
toilet-cushions rich with patterns, like ingrained pearls; such rolls
of lace, with running gossamer leaves, or edges fine as the pinked
carnations in Davy's garden. There were also collars with broad white
leaves and peeping buds, or wreathing embroidery like sea-weed, or
blanched moss, or magnified snow, or whatever you can think of as most
unlike work. Then there was a central basket, lined with white satin,
in which lay six cambric handkerchiefs, with all the folded corners
outwards, each corner of which shone as if dead-silvered with the
exquisitely wrought crest and motto of an ancient coroneted family.

"Oh, I never did see anything like them!" was all I could get out,
after peering into everything till the excelling whiteness pained my
sight. "Do tell me where you send them?"

"I used to send them to Madame Varneckel's, in High Street; but she
cheated me, and I send them now to the Quaker's, in Albemarle Square."

"You sell them, then?"

"Yes, of course; I should not work else. I do not love it."

"They ought to give you a hundred guineas for those."

"I have a hundred guineas already."

"You have!" I quite startled her by the start I gave. I very nearly
said, "Then why do you live up here?" but I felt, in time, that it
would be rude.

"Oh! I must get four hundred more, and that will take me two years, or
perhaps three, unless my voice comes out like a flower." Here her
baby-mouth burst into a smile most radiant,--a rose of light!

"Oh, Miss Benette, everything you say is like one of the German
stories,--a _Märchen_,[9] you know."

"Oh, do you talk German? I love it. I always spoke it till I came to
this city."

"What a pity you came!--at least, I should have been very sorry if you
had not come; but I mean, I should have thought you would like Germany
best."

"So I should, but I could not help coming; I was a baby when I came.
Mr. Davy brought me over in his arms, and he was just as old then as I
am now."

"How very odd! Mr. Davy never told me he had brought you here."

"Oh, no! he would not tell you all the good things he has done."

"He has done me good,--quite as much good as he can have done to you;
but I should so like to hear all about it."

"You must not stay,--you _shall_ go," she answered, with her grave
sweetness of voice and manner; "and if you are not in time to-day, we
shall never practise again. I shall be very sorry, for I like to sing
with you."

I was not in time, and I got the nearest thing to a scolding from my
mother, and a long reproof from Clo. She questioned me as to where I
had been, and I was obliged to answer. The locality did not satisfy
her; she said it was a low neighborhood, and one in which I might
catch all sorts of diseases. I persisted that it was as high and dry
as we were, and possessed an advantage over us in that it had better
air, being, as it was, all but out in the fields. My mother was rather
puzzled about the whole matter, but she declared her confidence in me,
and I was contented, as she ever contents me. I was very grateful to
her, and assured them all how superior was Miss Benette to all the
members of the class. I also supplicated Millicent to accompany me the
next time I should be allowed to go, that she might see the beautiful
work.

"I cannot go, my dear Charles," she returned. "If this young lady be
what you yourself make her out to be, it would be taking a great
liberty; and besides, she could not want me,--I do not sing in the
class."

But she looked very much as if she wished she did.

"I just wish you would ask Mr. Davy about her, that's all."

FOOTNOTES:

[8] The idea that Laura Lemark was intended as a sketch of Taglioni,
the _danseuse_, is altogether fanciful; except the fact that Taglioni
in her old age taught deportment to ladies who desired to be presented
at the English court, and that Laura did the same after she had
retired, there is no resemblance between them.

[9] A tale, or romance.




CHAPTER XIV.


When I went to the class next time I was very eager to catch Mr. Davy,
that I might explain to him where I had been, for I did not like
acting without his cognizance. However, he was already down below when
I arrived. My fair companions were both in their places, but, to my
astonishment, Miss Benette took no notice of me. Her sweet face was as
grave as it was before I caught from under those long lashes the azure
light upon my own for the first time. Certain that she did not mean to
offend me, I got on very well though, and Davy was very much pleased
with our success.

Little Laura looked very pale; her hair was out of its curl, and
altogether she had an appearance as if she had been dragged through a
river, lost and forlorn, and scarcely sensible. She sang languidly,
but Miss Benette's clinging tones would not suffer me to be aware of
any except hers and my own.

Davy taught us something about Gregorian chants, and gave us a few to
practise, besides a new but extremely simple service of his own. "He
wrote that for us, I suppose," I ventured; and Clara nodded seriously,
but made no assent in words. Afterwards she seemed to remember me
again as her ally; for as Davy wished us his adieu in his wonted free
"Good-night!" she spoke to me of her own accord.

"I think it was all the better that we practised."

"Oh, was it not? Suppose we practise again."

"I should like it, if you will come at the same time, and not stay
longer; and Laura can come too, can she not?"

I did not exactly like this idea, but I could not contradict the calm,
mellow voice.

"Oh, if she will practise."

"Of course she will practise if she comes on purpose."

"I don't care about coming!" exclaimed the child, in a low, fretful
voice. "I know I sha'n't get out, either."

"Yes, you shall; I will coax your papa. Look, Laura! there he is,
waiting for you."

The child ran off instantly, with an air of fear over all her fatigue,
and I felt sure she was not treated like a child; but I said nothing
about it then.

"Sir," said I to Mr. Davy, "pray walk a little way, for I want to tell
you something. My mother particularly requests that you will go to our
house to sup with us this evening."

"I will accept her kindness with the greatest pleasure, as I happen to
be less engaged than usual."

Davy never bent his duty to his pleasure,--rather the reverse.

"I went to practise with Miss Benette the day before yesterday."

"So she told me."

"She told you herself?"

"Yes, when she came to my house for her lesson last afternoon. I was
very glad to hear it, because such singing as hers will improve yours.
But I should like to tell your mother how she is connected with me."

"How was it, sir?"

"Oh! I shall make a long story for her; but enough for you that her
father was very good to me when I was an orphan boy and begged my way
through Germany. He taught me all that I now teach you; and when he
died, he asked me to take care of his baby and his lessons. She was
only born that he might see her, and die."

"Oh, sir, how strange! Poor man! he must have been very sorry."

"He was not sorry to go, for he loved his wife, and she went first."

"Oh, that was Miss Benette's mamma?"

"Yes, her lovely mamma."

"Of course she was lovely. If you please, sir, tell me about her too."
But Davy reserved his tale until we were at home.

My mother fully expected him, it was evident; for upon the table,
besides the plain but perfectly ordered meal we always enjoyed at
about nine o'clock, stood the supernumerary illustrations--in honor of
a guest--of boiled custards, puff pastry, and our choicest preserves.
My mother, too, was sitting by the fire in a species of state, having
her hands void of occupation and her pocket-handkerchief outspread.
Millicent and Lydia wore their dahlia-colored poplin frocks,--quite a
Sunday costume,--and Clo revealed herself in purple silk, singularly
adapted for evening wear, as it looked black by candle-light!

I never sat up to supper except on very select occasions. I knew this
would be one, without being told so, and secured the next chair to my
darling friend's.

I would that I could recall, in his own expressive language, his exact
relation of his own history as told to us that night. It struck us
that he should so earnestly acquaint us with every incident,--at
least, it surprised us then, but his after connection with ourselves
explained it in that future.

No fiction could be more fraught with fascinating personality than his
actual life. I pass over his birth in England (and in London), in a
dark room over a dull book-shop, in his father's house. That father,
from pure breeding and constitutional exclusiveness, had avoided all
intercourse with his class, and conserved his social caste by his
marriage only. I linger not upon his remembrance of his mother,
Sybilla Lenhart,--herself a Jewess, with the most exquisite musical
ability,--nor upon her death in her only son's tenth year.

His father's pining melancholy meantime deepened into an abstraction
of misery on her loss. The world and its claims lost their hold, and
he died insolvent when Lenhart was scarcely twelve.

Then came his relation of romantic wanderings in Southern France and
Germany, like a troubadour, or minnesinger, with guitar and song; of
his accidental friendships and fancy fraternities, till he became
choir-alto at a Lutheran church in the heart of the Eichen-Land. Then
came the story of his attachment to the young, sage organist of that
very church, who, in a fairy-like adventure, had married a count's
youngest daughter, and never dared to disclose his alliance; of her
secret existence with him in the topmost room of an old house, where
she never dared to look out of the window to the street for fear she
should be discovered and carried back,--the etiquette requisite to
cover such an abduction being quite alien from my comprehension, by
the way, but so Davy assured us she found it necessary to abide; of
their one beautiful infant born in the old house, and the curious
saintly carving about its wooden cradle; of the young mother, too
hastily weaned from luxurious calm to the struggling dream of poverty,
or at least uncertain thrift; of her fading, falling into a stealthy
sickness, and of the night she lay (a Sunday night) and heard the
organ strains swell up and melt into the moonlight from her husband's
hand; of Lenhart Davy's presence with her alone that night, unknowing,
until the music-peal was over, that her soul had passed to heaven, as
it were, in that cloud of music.

But I must just observe that Davy made as light as possible of his own
pure and characteristic decision, developed even in boyhood. He passed
over, almost without comment, the more than elder brotherly care he
must have bestowed on the beautiful infant, and dwelt, as if to divert
us from that point, upon the woful cares that had pressed upon his
poor friend,--upon his own trouble when the young organist himself,
displaced by weakness from his position, made his own end, even as
Lenhart's father, an end of sorrow and of love.

Davy, indeed, merely mentioned that he had brought little Clara to
England himself, and left her in London with his own mother's sister,
whose house he always reckoned his asylum, if not his home. And then
he told us of his promise to Clara's father that she should be brought
up musically, and that no one should educate her until she should be
capacitated to choose her own masters, except Davy, to whom her father
had imparted a favorite system of his own.

I remember his saying, in conclusion, to my mother: "You must think it
strange, dear madam, that I brought Miss Benette away from London, and
alone. I could not remain in London myself, and I have known for years
that her voice, in itself, would become to her more than the expected
heritage. My aunt taught her only to work. This was my stipulation;
and she now not only supports herself by working,--for she is very
independent,--but is in possession of a separate fund besides, which
is to carry her through a course of complete instruction
elsewhere,--perhaps in Italy or Germany."

I saw how much my mother felt impressed by the dignity and
self-reliance that so characterized him, but I scarcely expected she
would take so warm an interest in his _protégée_. She said she should
like to see some of Miss Benette's work; and again I descanted on its
beauties and varieties, supported by my hero, who seemed to admire it
almost as much as I did.

"Then I may go and practise with Miss Benette?" I said, in conclusion.

"Oh, certainly; and you must ask her to come and see you some evening
when Mr. Davy is kind enough to drink tea with us."

"That curious little Laura too," thought I; "they would not like _her_
so well, I fancy. But though I do dislike her myself, I wish I could
find out what they do with her."

I was going to practise the day after the next, and methought I will
then discover.




CHAPTER XV.


I took a very small pot of honey for Miss Benette; Millicent had
begged it for me of Lydia, who was queen-bee of the store-closet. I
ran all the way as usual, and was very glad to get in. The same
freshness pervaded the staircase; but when I reached the black door, I
heard two voices instead of one. I was rather put out. "Laura is
there! I shall not like singing with her; it is very tiresome!" I
stood still and listened; it was very lovely. How ineffable music must
be to the blind! yet oh, to miss that which may be embraced by sight!
I knocked, and they did not hear me; again--they both ceased singing,
and Laura ran to the door. Instead of being dressed in her old
clothes, she perfectly startled me by the change in her costume,--a
glittering change, and one from herself; for through it she appeared
unearthly, and if not spiritual, something very near it. Large gauze
pantaloons, drawn in at the ankles, looked like globes of air about
her feet; her white silk slippers were covered with spangles; so also
was her frock, and made of an illusive material like clouds; and her
white sash, knotted at her side, was edged with silver fringe. Her
amber necklace was no more there, but on her arms she had thick silver
rings, with little clinking bells attached. She wore her hair, not in
those stray ringlets, but drawn into two broad plaits, unfastened by
knot or ribbon; but a silver net covered all her head behind, though
it met not her forehead in front, over whose wide, but low expanse,
her immense eyes opened themselves like lustrous moons.

"Miss Lemark," cried I, unfeignedly, "what are you going to do in that
dress?"

"Come, Master Auchester, do not trouble her; she must be ready for her
papa when he calls, so I have dressed her in order that she might
practise with us."

"Miss Benette," I answered, "I think it is most extremely pretty,
though very queer; and I did not mean to tease her. I wish you would
tell me why you put it on, though."

"To dance in," said Laura, composedly. "I am going to dance in
'Scheradez, or the Magic Pumpkin.' It is so pretty! But Miss Benette
is so kind to me; she lets me have tea with her the nights I dance."

"But do you live in this house, then?"

"Oh, I wish I did! Oh, Clara, I wish I did live with you!" and she
burst into a fit of her tears.

Miss Benette arose and came to her, laying down a piece of muslin she
was embroidering. "Do not cry, dear; it will spoil your pretty
frock,--besides, Master Auchester has come on purpose to sing, and you
detain him."

Laura instantly sat on a chair before the music-stand; her diaphanous
skirts stood round her like the petals of a flower, and with the tears
yet undried she began to sing, in a clear little voice, as
expressionless as her eyes, but as enchanting to the full as her easy,
painless movements. It was very pleasurable work now, and Clara
corrected us both, she all the while sustaining a pure golden soprano.

"I am tired," suddenly said Laura.

"Then go into the other room and rest a little. Do not ruffle your
hair, which I have smoothed so nicely, and be sure not to lie down
upon the bed, or you will make those light skirts as flat as
pancakes."

"How am I to rest, then?"

"In the great white chair."

"But I don't want to sit still,--I only mean I am tired of singing. I
want to dance my _pas_."

"Then go into the other room all the same; there is no carpet,--it is
best."

"I don't like dancing in that room, it is so small."

"It is not smaller than this one. The fact is, you want to dance to
Master Auchester."

"Yes, so I do."

"But he came to sing, not to see you."

"I should like to see her dance, though," said I. "Do let her, Miss
Benette!"

"If you can stay. But do not begin the whole of that dance,
Laura,--only the finale, because there will not be time; and you will
besides become too warm, if you dance from the beginning, for the cold
air you must meet on your way to the theatre."

Miss Benette's solemn manner had great authority over the child, it
was certain. She waited until the elder had put aside the brown
table,--"That you may not blow my bits of work about and tread upon
them," she remarked. "Shall I sing for you, Laura?"

"Oh, please do, pray do, Miss Benette!" I cried; "it will be so
charming."

She began gravely, as in the anthem, but with the same serene and
genial perfection, to give the notes of a wild measure, in triple
time, though not a waltz.

Laura stood still and gazed upwards until the opening bars had
sounded, then she sprang, as it were, into space, and her whole aspect
altered. Her cheeks grew flushed as with a fiery impulse; her arms
were stretched, as if embracing something more ethereal than her own
presence; a suavity, that was almost languor, at the same time took
possession of her motions. The figure was full of difficulty, the time
rapid, the step absolutely twinkling. I was enraptured; I was lost in
this kind of wonder,--"How very strange that any one should call
dancing wrong when it is like that! How extraordinary that every one
does not think it lovely! How mysterious that no one should talk about
her as a very great wonder! She is almost as great a wonder as Miss
Benette. I should like to know whether Mr. Davy has seen her dance."

But though I called it dancing, as I supposed I must, it was totally
unlike all that I had considered dancing to be. She seemed now
suspended in the air, her feet flew out with the spangles like a
shower of silver sparks, her arms were flung above her, and the silver
bells, as she floated by me without even brushing my coat, clinked
with a thrilling monotone against Clara's voice. Again she whirled
backwards, and, letting her arms sink down, as if through water or
some resisting medium, fell into an attitude that restored the
undulating movement to her frame, while her feet again twinkled, and
her eyes were raised. "Oh!" I exclaimed, "how lovely you look when you
do that!" for the expression struck me suddenly. It was an
illumination as from above, beyond the clouds, giving a totally
different aspect from any other she had worn. But lost in her maze,
she did not, I believe, hear me. She quickened and quickened her
footsteps till they merely skimmed the carpet, and, with a slide upon
the very air, shook the silver bells as she once more arched her arms
and made a deep and spreading reverence. Miss Benette looked up at me
and smiled.

"Now you must go; it is your time, and I want to give Laura her tea."

"I have brought you some honey, Miss Benette. Will you eat it with
your bread? It is better than bonbons, Miss Laura."

"I did not care for the bonbons; I only thought you would like them.
They gave them to me at rehearsal."

"Do you go to rehearsal, then, as well as the singers?"

"I go to rehearsal in the ballet; and when there is no ballet I sing
in the chorus."

"But you are so little: do you always dance?"

"I am always to dance now; I did not until this season."

Her voice was dreamy and cold, the flush had already faded; she seemed
not speaking with the slightest consciousness.

"Do go, Master Auchester!" and Clara looked at me from her azure eyes
as kindly as if she smiled. "Do go, or she will have no tea, and will
be very tired. I am so much obliged to you for the sweet yellow honey;
I shall keep it in my closet, in that pretty blue jar."

I _would_ have the blue jar, though Lydia wanted me to take a white
one.

"Oh, pray eat the honey, and give me the jar to fill again! I won't
stay, don't be afraid, but good-night. Won't you let me shake hands
with you, Miss Lemark?" for she still stood apart, like a reed in a
sultry day. She looked at me directly. "Good-night, dear!" I was so
inexpressibly touched by the tone, or the manner, or the mysterious
something--that haunted her dancing--in _her_, that I added, "Shall I
bring you some flowers next class-night?"

"If you please."

"Oh, do go, Master Auchester! I prayed you ten minutes ago."

"I am gone." And so I was; and this time I was not too late for my own
tea at home.

There must be something startlingly perfect in that which returns upon
the soul with a more absolute impression after its abstraction of our
faculties has passed away. So completely had the fascination of those
steps sufficed that I forgot the voice of Miss Benette, resounding all
the time, and only associated in my recollection the silver monotone
of the clinking bells with the lulling undulation, the quivering feet.
All night long, when I dreamed, it was so; and when I awoke in the
morning (as usual), I thought the evening before, a dream.

I dared not mention Laura to any one except Millicent, but I could not
exist without some species of sympathy; and when I had finished all my
tasks, I entreated her to go out with me alone. She had some purchases
to make, and readily agreed. It was a great treat to me to walk with
her at any time. I cannot recollect how I introduced the subject, but
I managed to ask somehow, after some preamble, whether my mother
thought it wrong to dance in public.

"Of course not," she replied, directly. "Some people are obliged to do
so in order to live. They excel in that art as others excel in other
arts, and it is a rare gift to possess the faculty to excel in that,
as in all other arts."

"So, Millicent, she would not mind my knowing a dance-artist any more
than any other artist?"

"Certainly it is the greatest privilege to know true artists; but
there are few in the whole world. How few, then, there must be in our
little corner of it!"

"You call Mr. Davy an artist, I suppose?"

"I think he pursues art as a student, who, having learned its first
principles for himself, is anxious to place others in possession of
them before he himself soars into its higher mysteries. So far I call
him philanthropist and aspirant, but scarcely an artist yet."

"Was our conductor an artist?"

"Oh! I should think so, no doubt. Why did you ask me about artists,
Charles?"

"Oh, I suppose you would not call a little girl an artist if she were
as clever as possible. There is a little girl at the class who sits
very near me. She is a great favorite of Miss Benette. Such a curious
child, Millicent! I could not endure her till yesterday evening. She
was there when I went to practise, all ready dressed for the theatre.
She looked a most lovely thing,--not like a person at all, but as if
she could fly; and she wore such beautiful clothes!"

Millicent was evidently very much surprised.

"She lives with Miss Benette, then, Charles?"

"Oh, no; for I asked her, and she said she wished she did. I should
rather think somebody or other is unkind to her, for Miss Benette
seems to pity her so much. Well, I was going to tell you, Millicent,
she danced! Oh, it was beyond everything! You never saw anything so
exquisite. I could hardly watch her about the room; she quite swam,
and turned her eyes upward. She looked quite different from what she
was at the class."

"I should think so. I have always heard that stage dancing is very
fascinating, but I have never seen it, you know; and I do not think
mother would like you to see her often, for she considers you too
young to go to a theatre at all."

"Why should I be?"

"I don't know all her reasons, but the chief one I should suspect to
be, is that it does not close until very late, and that the ballet is
the last thing of all in the entertainment."

"Yes, I know the ballet. Laura does dance in the ballet, she told me
so. But she danced in the daylight when I saw her, so there could be
no harm in it."

"No harm! There is no harm in what is beautiful; but mother likes you
to be fresh for everything you do in the daytime, and that cannot be
unless you sleep early, no less than well. She asked me the other day
whether I did not think you looked very pale the mornings after the
classes."

"Oh, what did you say?"

"I said, 'He is always pale, dear mother, but he never looks so
refreshed by any sleep as when he comes down those mornings, I
think.'"

"Dear Millicent! you are so kind, I shall never forget it. Now do come
and call upon Miss Benette."

"My dear Charles, I have never been introduced to her."

"How formal, to be sure! She would be so glad if we went; she would
love you directly,--everybody does."

"I do not wish they should, Charles. You must know very well I had
better keep away. I do not belong to the class, and if she lives
alone, she of course prefers not to be intruded upon by strangers."

"Of course not, generally. I am sure she ought not to live alone. She
must be wanting somebody to speak to sometimes."

"You are determined she shall have you, at all events."

"Oh, no! I am nothing to her, I know; but I can sing, so she likes me
to go."

"I suppose she is quite a woman, Charles?"

"Oh, yes! she is fourteen."

"My dear Charles, she cannot live alone. She is but a child, then; I
thought her so much older than that."

"Oh! did not Mr. Davy say so the other night?"

"I did not notice; I do not think so."

"Oh! he told me the first time I asked him about her."

Millicent laughed again, as we went on, at the idea of her living
alone. I still persisted it was a fact.




CHAPTER XVI.


The next being _our_ night, after dinner the next day I went to my
garden. It was growing latest autumn, but still we had had no frosts.
My monthly roses were in full bloom, my fuchsias flower-laden. Then I
had a geranium or two, labelled with my name, in the little
greenhouse. I gathered as many as I could hold in both my hands, and
carried them into the parlor.

"You have some flowers there," said Clo, with condescension.

"It is a pity to gather them when there are so few out," remarked
Lydia, without lifting her eyes from her work.

I took no notice of them. Millicent beckoned me out of the parlor.

"I will give you some ribbon, Charles, if you will come to my room."

So she did, and she arranged my flowers so as to infuse into their
autumnal aspect the glow of summer, so skilfully she grouped the
crimson of the geraniums against the pale roses and purple stocks. I
set forth, holding them in my hand. For the first time, I met Davy
before I went in. He shook hands, and asked me to come to tea with him
on the morrow.

Clara was there alone. She greeted me gravely, and yet I thought she
would have smiled, had there not been something to make her grave.

"Miss Benette!" I whispered, but she would not answer.

Davy had just emerged below. We were making rapid progress. I always
made way, not only because my ear was true and my voice pure, but
because I was sustained by the purest voice and the truest ear in the
class. But now the other voices grew able to support themselves, and
nothing can be imagined more perfect in its way than the communion of
the parts as they exactly balanced each other,--the separate voices
toned down and blended into a full effect that extinguished any
sensible difference between one and another.

I am very matter of fact, I know; but that is better than to be
commonplace,--and not the same thing, though they are often
confounded. If the real be the ideal, then is the matter of fact the
true. This ghost of an aphorism stalked forth from my brain, whose
chambers are unfraught with book-lore as with worldly knowledge; and
to lay its phantomship, I am compelled to submit it to paper.

I could not make Clara attend to me until all was over. Then she said
to me of her own accord,--

"Little Laura is ill; she caught cold after she danced the other
evening, and has been in bed since."

"Will you have these flowers, then? I am afraid they are half faded,
though my hand is very cold."

"I will take them to Laura,--she has no flowers."

"I am very sorry; I hope it was not my fault,--I mean, I hope it did
not tire her to dance before me first."

"Oh, no! it was her papa's fault for letting her come into the cold
air without being well wrapped up. She had a shawl to put on, and a
cloak besides, of mine; but her papa gave them to somebody else."

"How dreadfully unkind! Is it her papa who did such a thing?"

"Her own father. But look, Master Auchester, there is Mr. Davy
beckoning to you. And I must go,--my nurse is waiting for me."

"So is mine, downstairs. Have you a nurse too?"

"I call her so; she came from Germany to find me, and now I take care
of her."

I was very anxious to see how Davy would address his adopted child,
who numbered half his years, and I still detained her, hoping that he
would join us. I was not mistaken; for Davy, smiling to himself at my
obstinate disregard of his salute, stepped up through the intervening
forms. "So you would not come down, Charles! I wanted to ask you to
come early, as I wish to try your voice with Miss Benette's. Come at
least by five o'clock."

He looked at Clara, and I looked at her. Without a smile upon her
sweet face (but in the plenitude of that infantine gravity which so
enchanted the _not_ youngest part of myself), she bowed to him and
answered, "If you please, sir. Then I am not to come in the morning?"

"Oh, yes, in the morning also, if you can spare time. You know why I
wish to hear you sing together?"

"Yes, sir,--you told me. Good night, Master Auchester, and, sir, to
you."

And she ran out, having replaced her black bonnet and long veil. Davy
spoke a few words of gratified commendation in reference to our
universal progress, and then, as the room was nearly empty, brought me
downstairs. I asked him about Laura.

"Oh! she is not dangerously ill."

"But I suppose she may be suffering," I added, in a sharp tone, for
which I had been reproved times without number at home.

"Why, as to that, we must all instruct ourselves to suffer. I am very
sorry for my little pupil. She has had an attack of inflammation, but
is only now kept still by weakness, Miss Benette tells me."

"Miss Benette is very good to her, I think."

"Miss Benette is very good to everybody," said Davy, earnestly, with a
strange, bright meaning in his accent I looked up at him, but it was
too dark to see his expressive face, for now we were in the street.

"She is good to me, but could hardly be so to you, sir. She says you
have done everything for her, and do still."

"I try to do my duty by her; but I owe to her more than I can ever
repay."

How curious, to be sure! I thought, but I did not say so, there was a
preventive hush in his tone and manner.

"I should so like to know what we shall sing to-morrow."

"So you shall, _to-morrow_; but to-night I scarcely know myself. I
will come in with you, that I may obtain your mother's permission to
run away with you again,--but not to another festival just yet; I
could almost say, 'Would that it were!'"

"I could quite, sir."

"But we must make a musical feast ourselves, you and I."

"Oh, sir! pray let me be a side-dish."

"That you shall be. But here we are."

Supper was spread in our parlor, and my sisters looked a perfect
picture of health, comfort, and interest--three beatitudes of domestic
existence. Lydia answered to the first, Clo to the second (she having
fallen asleep in her chair by the charmingly brilliant fire), and dear
Millicent, on our entrance, to the third; for she looked half up and
glowed, the firelight played upon her brow, but there was a gleam,
more like moonlight, upon her lips as she smiled to welcome us. My
mother, fresh from a doze, sympathetic with Clo, extended her hand
with all her friendliness to Davy, and forced him to sit down and
begin upon the plate she had filled, before she would suffer him to
speak. It was too tormenting, but so it was, that she thought proper
to send me to bed after I had eaten a slice of bread and marmalade,
before he had finished eating. I gave Millicent a look into her eyes,
however, which I knew she understood, and I therefore kept awake,
expecting her after Margareth had put out my candle. My fear was lest
my mother, dear creature, should come up first, for I still slept in a
corner of her room; but I knew Davy could not leave without my knowing
it, as every sound passed into my brain from below. At last I listened
for the steps, for which I was always obliged to listen, soft as her
touch and gentle eyes, and I felt Millicent enter all in the dark.

"Well, Charles!" she began, as she put aside my curtain and leaned
against my mattress, "it is another treat for you, though not so great
a one as your first glory, and you will have to sustain your own
credit rather more specially. Do you know the Priory, on the
Lawborough Road, not a great way from Mr. Hargreave's factory?"

"Yes, I know it; what of that?"

"The Redferns live there, and the young ladies are Mr. Davy's pupils."

"Not at the class, I suppose?"

"No; but Mr. Davy gives them singing lessons, and he says they are
rather clever, though perhaps not _too_ really musical. They are very
fond of anything new; and now they intend to give a large musical
party, as they have been present at one during a stay they made in
London lately. It is to be a very select party; some amateur
performers are expected, and Mr. Davy is going to sing professionally.
Not only so, the young ladies' pianoforte master will be present, and
most likely a truly great player, Charles, an artist,--the violinist
Santonio."

"Was he at the festival?"

"Oh, no! Mr. Davy says they have written to him to come from London.
But now I must explain _your_ part. Mr. Davy was requested to bring a
vocal quartet from his class, as none of the guests can sing in parts.
He is to take Miss Benette as a soprano, for he says her soprano is as
superior as her lower voice."

"So it is."

"And some tenor or other."

"Mr. Newton, I daresay; he leads all the others."

"I think it was. And you, Charles, he wishes to take, for he says your
alto voice is very beautiful. You will do your best, I know."

"I would do _anything_ to hear a great violin-player."

And full of the novel notion, I fell asleep much sooner than I did (as
a child) when no excitement was before me.




CHAPTER XVII.


My mother, besides being essentially an unworldly person, had, I
think, given up the cherished idea of my becoming a great mercantile
character, and even the expectation that I should take kindly to the
prospective partnership with Fred; for certainly she allowed me to
devote more time to my music tasks with Millicent than to any others.
I owe a great deal to that sister of mine, and particularly the early
acquaintance I made with intervals, scales, and chords. Already she
had taught me to play from figured basses a little, to read elementary
books, and to write upon a ruled slate simple studies in harmony.

Hardly conscious who helped me on, I was helped very far indeed. Other
musicians, before whom I bow, have been guided in the first toneless
symbols and effects of tone by the hand, the voice, the brain of
women; but they have generally been famous women. My sister was a
quiet girl. Never mind; she had a fame of her own at last. Davy,
considering I was in progress, said no more about teaching me himself,
and indeed it was unnecessary. I was certainly rather surprised at my
mother's permission for me to accompany him to the Redferns', first
and chiefly because I had never visited any house she did not frequent
herself, and she had never been even introduced to this family, though
we had seen them in their large pew at church, and I was rather fond
of watching them,--they being about our choicest gentry. For all the
while I conceived I should be a visitor, and that each of us would be
on the same footing.

Had I not been going to accompany Davy, I should have become nervous
at the notion of attending a great party met at a fashionable house;
but as it was, it did but conceal for me a glorious unknown, and I
exulted while I trembled a little at my secret heart.

But I went to my master as he had requested, and he let me into his
shell. I smelt again that delicious tea, and it exhilarated me as on
the first occasion. Upstairs, in the little room, was Miss Benette.
She was dressed as usual, but I thought she had never worn anything
yet so becoming as that plain black silk frock. The beautiful china
was upon the table, now placed for three; and child as I was, I could
not but feel most exquisitely the loveliness of that simplicity which
rendered so charming and so convenient the association of three ages
so incongruous.

There are few girls of fourteen who are women enough to comport
themselves with the inbred dignity that appertains to woman in her
highest development, and there are few women who retain the perfume
and essence of infancy. _These_ were flung around Clara in every
movement, at each smile or glance; and _those_ adorned her as with
regality,--a regality to which one is born, not with which one has
been invested. She did not make tea for Davy, nor did she interfere
with his little arrangements; but she sat by me and talked to me
spontaneously, while she only spoke when he questioned, or listened
while he spoke.

There was perfect serenity upon her face,--yes! just the serenity of a
cloudless heaven; and had I been older, I should have whispered to
myself that her peace of soul was all safe, so far as he was
concerned. But I did not think about it, though I might naturally have
done so, for I was romantic to intensity, even as a boy.

"How is Miss Lemark?" I suddenly inquired, while Davy was in the other
little room. I forgot to mention that my surmise was well founded,--he
_had_ no servant.

"She is much better, thank you, or I should not have come here. The
flowers look very fresh to-day, and she lies where she can see them."

"When will she get up?"

"I have persuaded her to remain in bed even longer than she needs; for
the moment she gets up they will make her dance, and she is not strong
enough for that yet."

Davy here returned, and we began to sing. We had a delicious hour. In
that small room Clara's voice was no more too powerfully perceptible
than is the sunlight in its entrance to a tiny cell,--that glory which
itself is the day of heaven. She sang with the most rarefied softness,
and I quite realized how infinitely she was my superior in art no less
than by nature.

What we chiefly worked upon were glees, single quartet pieces, and an
anthem; but last of all, Davy produced two duets for soprano and
alto,--one from Purcell, the other from a very old opera, the hundred
and something one of the Hamburg Kaiser, which our master had himself
copied from a copy.

"Shall you sing with us in all the four-parted pieces, sir?" I
ventured to ask during the symphony of this last.

"Yes, certainly; and I shall accompany you both invariably. But of all
things do not be afraid, nor trouble yourselves the least about
singing in company: nothing is so easy as to sing in a high room like
that of the Redferns', and nothing is so difficult as to sing in a
small room like this."

"I do not find it so difficult, sir," said Clara, gravely.

"That is because, Miss Benette, you have already had your voice under
perfect control for months. You have been accustomed to practise nine
hours a day without an instrument, and nothing is so self-supporting
as such necessity."

"Yes, sir, it is very good, but not so charming as to sing with your
sweet piano."

"Do you really practise nine hours a day, Miss Benette?"

"Yes, Master Auchester, always; and I find it not enough."

"But do you practise without a piano?"

"Yes, it is best for me; but when I come to my lessons and hear the
delightful keys, I feel as if music had come out of heaven to talk
with me."

"Ah, Miss Benette!" said Davy, with a kind of exultation, "what will
it be when you are singing _in_ the heart of a grand orchestra?"

"I never heard one, sir, you know; but I should think that it was like
going into heaven after music and remaining there."

"But were you not at the festival, Miss Benette?"

"Oh, no!"

"How very odd, when I was there!"

Davy looked suddenly at her; but though his quick, bright glance might
have startled away her answer, that came as calmly as all her
words,--like a breeze awakening from the south.

"I did not desire to go; Mr. Davy had the kindness to propose I
should, but I knew it would make me idle afterwards, and I cannot
afford to waste my time. I am growing old."

"Now, Miss Benette, there is our servant or your nurse," for I heard a
knock. "Will you let me come to-morrow?"

"Just for half an hour only, because I want to sit with Laura."

"I thank you; thank you!"

"How did you get home last night?" I asked, on the promised meeting.
She was sitting at the window, where the light was strongest, for her
delicate work was in her hand; and as the beams of a paler sun came in
upon her, I thought I had seen something like her somewhere before in
a picture as it were framed in a dusky corner, but itself making for
its own loveliness a shrine of light. Had I travelled among studios
and galleries, I must have been struck by her likeness to those
rich-hued but fairest ideals of the sacred schools of painting which
have consecrated the old masters as worshippers of the highest in
woman; but I had never seen anything of the kind except in cold
prints. That strange reminiscence of what we never have really seen,
in what we at present behold, appertains to a certain temperament
only,--that temperament in which the ideal notion is so definite that
all the realities the least approximating thereunto strike as its
semblances, and all that it finds beautiful it compares so as to
combine with the beautiful itself. I do not suppose I had this
consciousness that afternoon, but I perfectly remember saying, before
Clara rose to welcome me as she always did, "You look exactly like a
picture."

"Do I? But no people in pictures are made at work. Oh, it is very
unpicturesque!" and she smiled.

"I am not going to sing, Miss Benette; there is no time in just half
an hour."

"I _must_ practise, Master Auchester; I cannot afford to lose my half
hours and half hours."

"But I want to ask you some questions. Now do answer me, please."

"You shall make long questions, then, and I short answers."

She began to sing her florid exercises, a paper of which lay open upon
the desk, in Davy's hand.

"Well, first I want to know why are they unkind to Laura, and what
they do to her which is unkind."

"It would not be unkind if Laura were altogether like her father, as
she is in some respects, because then she would have no feeling; but
she has the feeling of which her mother died."

"That is a longer answer than I expected, but not half enough; I want
to know so much more. How pretty your hands are,--so pink!" I remarked
admiringly, as I watched the dimples in them, and the infantinely
rounded fingers, as they spread so softly amidst the delicate cambric.

"So are yours very pretty hands, Master Auchester, and they are very
white too. But never mind the hands now. I should like to tell you
about Laura, because if you become a great musician you will perhaps
be able to do her a kindness."

"What sort of kindness?"

"Oh, I cannot say, my thoughts do not tell me; but any kindness is
great to her. She has a clever father, but he has no more heart than
this needle, though he is as sharp and has as clear an eye. He made
his poor little wife dance even when she was ill; but that was before
I knew Laura. When I came here from London with Mr. Davy, I knew
nobody; but one evening I was singing and working while Thoné (that is
my nurse) was gone out to buy me food, when I suddenly heard a great
crying in the street. I went downstairs and opened the door, and there
I found a little girl, with no bonnet upon her head, who wore a gay
frock all covered with artificial flowers. My nurse was there too.
Thoné can't talk much English, but she said to me, 'Make her speak. I
found her sitting down in the gutter, all bathed in tears.'

"Then I said, in my English, 'Do tell me why you were in the streets,
pretty one, and why you wear these fine clothes in the mud.'

"'Oh, I cannot dance,' she cried, and sobbed; 'my feet are stiff with
standing all this morning, and if I try to begin before those lamps on
that slippery floor, I shall tumble down.'

"'You have run away from the theatre,' I said; and then I took her
upstairs in my arms (for she was very light and small), and gave her
some warm milk. Then, when she was hushed, I said, 'Were you to dance,
then? It is very pretty to dance: why were you frightened?'

"'I was so tired. Oh, I wish I could go to my mamma!'

"'I asked her where she was; and she began to shake her head and to
tell me her mamma was dead. But in the midst there was a great
knocking at the door downstairs. Laura was dreadfully alarmed, and
screamed; and while she was screaming, in came a great man, his face
all bedecked with paint. I could not speak to him, he would not hear
me, nor could we save the child then; for he snatched her up (all on
the floor as she was), and carried her downstairs in his arms. He was
very big, certainly, and had a fierce look, but did not hurt her; and
as I ran after him, and Thoné after me, we saw him put her into a
close coach and get in after her, and then they drove away. I was very
miserable that night, for I could not do anything for the poor child;
but I went the first thing the next morning to the theatre that had
been open the evening before. Thoné was with me, and took care of me
in that wild place. At last I made out who the little dancing-girl was
and where she lived, and then I went to that house. Oh, Master
Auchester! I thought my house so still, so happy after it. It was full
of noise and smells, and had a look that makes me very low,--a look of
discomfort all about. I said I wanted the manager, and half a dozen
smart, dirty people would have shown me the way; but I said, 'Only
one, if you please.'

"Then some young man conducted me upstairs into a greasy drawing-room.
Thoné did not like my staying, but I would stay, although I did not
once sit down. The carpet was gay, and there were muslin curtains; but
you, Master Auchester, could not have breathed there. I felt ready to
cry; but that would not have helped me, so I looked at the sky out of
the window till I heard some one coming in. It was the great man. He
was selfish-looking and vulgar, but very polite to me, and wanted me
to sit upon his sofa. 'No,' I said, 'I am come to speak about the
little girl who came to my house last night, and whom I was caring for
when you fetched her away. And I want to know why she was so afraid to
dance, and so afraid of you?'

"The man looked ready to eat me, but Thoné (who is a sort of gypsy,
Master Auchester) kept him down with her grand looks, and he turned
off into a laugh,--'I suppose I may do as I please with my own child!'

"'No, sir!' I said, 'not if you are an unnatural father, for in this
good land the law will protect her; and if you do not promise to
treat her well, I am going to the magistrate about it. I suppose she
has no mother; now, I have none myself, and I never see anybody
ill-treated who has no mother without trying to get them righted.'

"'You are a fine young lady to talk to me so. Why, you are a child
yourself! Who said I was unkind to my Laura? She must get her living,
and she can't do better than dance, as her mother danced before her. I
will send for her, and you shall hear what she will say for herself
this morning.'

"He shouted out upon the landing, and presently the child came down. I
was surprised to see that she looked happy, though very tired. I said,
'Are you better to-day?'

"'It was very nice,' she answered, 'and they gave me such pretty
flowers!'

"Then we talked a long time. I shall tire you, Master Auchester, if I
tell you all; but I found myself not knowing what to do, for though the
child had been made to go through a great deal of suffering--almost
all dancers must--yet she did so love the art that it was useless to
try and coax her out of her services for it. All I could do, then, was
to entreat her papa not to be severe with her, if even he was obliged
to be strict; and then (for he had told me she danced the night
before, the first time in public) I added to herself, 'You must try to
deserve the flowers they give you, and dance your very best And if you
practise well when you are learning in the mornings, it will become so
easy that you will not find it any pain at all, and very little
fatigue.'

"Her papa, I could see, was not ill-humored, but very selfish, and
would make the most of his clever little daughter; so I would not stay
any longer, lest he should forget what I had said. He was rather more
polite again before I went away, and in a day or two I sent Thoné with
a note to Laura, in which I asked her to tea--and, for a wonder, she
came. I am tiring you, Master Auchester?"

"Oh! do please, for pity's sake, go on, Miss Benette!"

"Well, when she came with Thoné, she was dressed much as she dresses
at the class, and I have not been able yet to persuade her to leave
off that ugly necklace. She talked to me a great deal. She was not
made to suffer until after her mother's death, for her mother was so
tender of her that she would allow no one to touch her but herself.
She taught her to dance, though; and little Laura told me so
innocently how she used to practise by the side of her mother's sick
bed, for she lay ill for many months. She had caught a cold--as Laura
did the other night--after a great dance, in which she grew very warm;
and at last she died of consumption. She had brought her husband a
good deal of money, and he determined to make the most of it as soon
as she was dead; for he brought Laura on very fast by teaching her all
day, and torturing her too, though I really believe he thought it was
necessary."

"Miss Benette!"

"Yes; for such persons as he have not sensations fine enough to let
them understand how some can be made to suffer delicately."

"Oh, go on!"

"Well, she was just ready to be brought out in a kind of fairy ballet,
in which children are required, the night the theatre opened this
season."

"And it was then she ran away?"

"Yes; when she got into the theatre she took fright."

"Did she dance that night, after all?"

"Oh, yes! and she liked it very much, for she is very excitable and
very fond of praise. Besides, she has a very bright soul, and she was
pleased with the sparkling scenery. As she described it, 'It was all
roses, and crystal, and beautiful music going round and round.' She is
a sweet little child when you really know her, and as innocent as the
two little daughters of the clergyman at St. Anthony's who go every
day past hand in hand, with their white foreheads and blue eyes, and
whose mamma sleeps by Laura's, in the same churchyard. Well, she came
to me several times, and at last I persuaded her papa to let her drink
tea with me, and it saves him trouble, so he is very glad she should.
It is the end of the season now, so I hope he will give her a real
holiday, and she will get quite strong."

"He fetches her, then, to go to the theatre?"

"Yes; it is not any trouble to him, for he calls on another person in
this lane, and they all go together."

"Do you know that person?"

"Oh, no! and Laura does not like her. But as Laura is obliged to see a
good deal of low people, I like her sometimes to see high people, that
her higher nature may not want food."

"I understand. Was that the reason she joined the class?"

"I persuaded her papa to allow her, by assuring him it would improve
her voice for singing in the chorus; and now he comes himself, though
I rather suspect it is because he likes to know all that is going on
in the town."

"She goes home with him, then?"

"Yes. The reason you saw Laura in her dancing-dress was that you might
like her. I bade her bring it, and put it on her myself. I did not
tell her why, but I wished you to see her too."

"But why did you wish me to like her, Miss Benette?"

"As I told you before,--that you may be kind to her; and also that she
might see some one very gentle, I wished her to be here with you."

"Am I gentle, do you consider?"

"I think you are a young gentleman," she answered, with her sweet
gravity.

"But I do not see how it could do her good exactly to see gentle
persons."

"Do not you? I do; I believe she will never become ungentle by living
with ungentle persons, as she does and must, if she once knows what
gentle persons are. I may be all wrong, but this is what I believe;
and when Laura grows up, I shall find out whether I am right. Oh! it
is good to love the beautiful; and if we once really love it, we can
surely not do harm."

"Miss Benette!" I exclaimed suddenly,--I really could not help it,--"I
think you are an angel."

She raised her blue eyes from the shadowy length of their lashes, and
fixed them upon the dim gray autumn heaven, then without a smile; but
her bright face shining even with the light of which smiles are born,
she replied in the words of Mignon, but with how apart a significance!
"I wish I were one!" then going on, "because then I shall be all
beautiful without and within me. But yet, no! I would not be an angel,
for I could not then sing in our class!"

I laughed out, with the most perfect sympathy in her sentiment; and
then she laughed, and looked at me exactly as an infant does in
mirthful play.

"Now, Miss Benette, one more question. Mr. Davy told me the other
night that you had done him good. What did he mean?"

"I do not think I can tell you what I believe he meant, because you
might mention it to him; and if he did not mean that, he would think
me silly, and I would not seem silly to him."

"Now, do pray tell me! Do you suppose I can go home unless you will?
You have made me so dreadfully curious. I should not think of telling
him you had told me. Now, what did you do for him that made him say
so?"

She replied, with an innocence the sister of which I have never seen
through all my dreams of woman,--

"Mr. Davy was so condescending as to ask me one day whether I would be
his wife,--sometime when I am grown up. And I said, No. I think that
was the good I did him."

I shall never forget the peculiar startled sensation that struck
through me. I had never entertained such a notion, or any notion of
the kind about anybody; and about her it was indeed new, and to me
almost an awe.

"The good you did him, Miss Benette!" I cried in such a scared tone
that she dropped her work into her lap. "I should have thought it
would have done him more good if you had said, Yes."

"You are very kind to think so," she replied, in a tone like a
confiding child's to a superior in age,--far from like an elder's to
one so young as myself,--"but I know better, Master Auchester. It was
the only thing I could do to show my gratitude."

"Were you sorry to say No, Miss Benette?"

"No; very glad and very pleased."

"But it is rather odd. I should have thought you would have liked to
say, Yes. You do not love him, then?"

"Oh! yes, I do, well. But I do not wish to belong to him, nor to any
one,--only to music now; and besides, I should not have had his love.
He wished to marry me that he might take care of me. But when he said
so, I answered, 'Sir, I can take care of myself.'"

"But, Miss Benette, how much should one love, and how, then, if one is
to marry? For I do not think all people marry for love!"

"You are not old enough to understand, and I am not old enough to tell
you," she said sweetly, with her eyes upon her work as usual, "nor do
I wish to know. If some people marry not for love, what is that to me?
I am not even sorry for them,--not so sorry as I am for those who know
not music, and whom music does not know."

"Oh! they are worse off!" I involuntarily exclaimed. "Do you think I
am 'known of music,' Miss Benette?"

"I daresay; for you love it, and will serve it. I cannot tell further,
I am not wise. Would you like to have your fortune told?"

"Miss Benette! what do you mean? You cannot tell fortunes!"

"But Thoné can. She is a gypsy,--a real gypsy, Master Auchester,
though she was naughty, and married out of her tribe."

"What tribe?"

"Hush!" said Clara, whisperingly; "she is in my other room at work,
and she would be wroth if she thought I was talking about her."

"But you said she cannot speak English."

"Yes; but she always has a feeling when I am speaking about her. Such
people have,--their sympathies are so strong."

Now, it happened we had often talked over gypsies and their
pretensions in our house, and various had been the utterances of our
circle. Lydia doomed them all as imposters; my mother, who had but an
ideal notion of them, considered, as many do, that they somehow
pertained to Israel. Clo presumed they were Egyptian, because of their
contour and their skill in pottery,--though, by the way, she had never
read upon the subject, as she always averred. But Millicent was
sufficient for me at once, when she had said one day, "At least they
are a distinct race, and possess in an eminent degree the faculty of
enforcing faith in the supernatural by the exercise of physical and
spiritual gifts that only act upon the marvellous."

I always understood Millicent, whatever she said, and I had often
talked with her about them. I rather suspect she believed them in her
heart to be Chaldean. I must confess, notwithstanding, that I was
rather nervous when Miss Benette announced, with such child-like
assurance, her intuitive credence in their especial ability to discern
and decipher destiny.

I said, "Do you think she can, then?"

"Perhaps it is vulgar to say 'tell fortunes,' but what I mean is, that
she could tell, by casting her eyes over you, and looking into your
eyes, and examining your brow, what kind of life you are most fit for,
and what you would make out of it."

"Oh, how I should like her to tell me!"

"She shall, then, if she may come in. But your half-hour has passed."

"Oh, do just let me stay a little!"

"You shall, of course, if you please, sir; only do not feel obliged."

She arose and walked out of the room, closing the door. I could catch
her tones through the wall, and she returned in less than a minute.
There was something startling, almost to appall, in the countenance
of the companion she ushered, coming close behind her. I can say that
that countenance was all eye,--a vivid and burning intelligence
concentred in orbs whose darkness was really light, flashing from
thence over every feature. Thoné was neither a gaunt nor a great
woman, though tall; her hands were beautifully small and slender, and
though she was as brunette as her eye was dark, she was clear as that
darkness was itself light. The white cap she wore contrasted strangely
with that rich hue, like sun-gilt bronze. She was old, but modelled
like a statue, and her lips were keen, severe, and something scornful.
It was amazing to me to see how easily Miss Benette looked and worked
before this prodigy; I was speechless. Thoné took my hand in hers, and
feeling I trembled, she said some quick words to Clara in a species of
Low German, whose accent I could not understand, and Clara replied in
the same. I would have withdrawn my hand, for I was beginning to fear
something dreadful in the way of an oracle, but Thoné led me with
irrepressible authority to the window. Once there, she fastened upon
me an almost feeling glance, and having scanned me a while, drew out
all my fingers one by one with a pressure that cracked every sinew of
my hand and arm. At last she looked into my palm, but made no
muttering, and did not appear trying to make out anything but the
streaks and texture of the skin. It could not have been ten minutes
that had passed when she let fall my hand, and addressing Clara in a
curt, still manner, without smile or comment, uttered in a voice whose
echoes haunt me still,--for the words were rare as music,--"Tonkunst
und Arzenei."[10]

I knew enough of German to interpret these, at all events, and as I
stood they passed into my being by conviction, they being indeed
truth.

Clara approached me. "Are you satisfied? Music _is_ medicine, though,
I think; do not you?"

She smiled with sweet mischief.

"Oh, Miss Benette, thank you a thousand times! for whether it is to be
true or not, I think it is a very good fortune to be told. Has she
told you yours?"

"Yes, often; at least as much as she told you about yourself, she has
revealed to me."

"Can she tell all people their fortunes?"

"I will ask her."

She turned to our bright Fate and spoke. On receiving a short, low
reply, as Thoné left the room, she again addressed me. "She says, 'I
cannot prophesy for the pure English, if there be any, because the
letters of their characters are not distinct. All I know in all, is
how much there is of ours in each.'"

"I don't know what she means."

"No more do I."

"Oh, Miss Benette, you do!" For her arch smile fluttered over her
lips.

"So I do; but, Master Auchester, it is getting very late,--you must
go, unless I may give you some tea. And your mother would like you to
be home. Therefore, go now."

I wanted to shake hands with her, but she made no show of willingness,
so I did not dare, and instantly I departed. What a wonderful spell it
was that bound me to the dull lane at the end of the town! Certainly
it is out of English life in England one must go for the mysteries and
realities of existence. I was just in time for our tea. As I walked
into the parlor the fire shone, and so did the kettle, singing to
itself; for in our English life we eschewed urns. Clo was reading,
Lydia at the board, Millicent was cutting great slices of homemade
bread. I thought to myself, "How differently we all manage here! If
Millicent did but dare, I know she would behave and talk like Miss
Benette."

"How is the young lady this afternoon, Charles? I wish you to ask her
to come and drink tea with us on Sunday after service."

"Yes, mother; is Mr. Davy coming?"

"He promised the other night."

"And Charles," added Clo, "do not forget that you must go with me
to-morrow and be measured for a jacket."

"I am to wear one at last, then?"

"Yes, for now you are really growing too tall for frocks."

I was very glad; for I abjured those braided garments, compassing
about my very heels with bondage, with utter satisfaction. Still, I
was amused. "I suppose it is for this party I am going to," thought I.

FOOTNOTE:

[10] Music and Medicine.




CHAPTER XVIII.


The next day at class, Laura's place still being empty, I watched
eagerly for Clara. The people were pouring in at the door, and I,
knowing their faces, could not but feel how unlike she was to them
all, when in the way she appeared, so bright in her dark dress, with
her cloudless forehead and air of ecstatic innocence. She spoke to me
to-day.

"How are you?"

"Quite well; and you, Miss Benette? But I want you to listen to me
presently; seriously, I have something to say."

"I'll wait," and she took her seat.

Davy extolled our anthem, and did not stop us once, which fact was
unprecedented. We all applauded _him_ when he praised _us_, at which
he laughed, but was evidently much pleased. In fact, he had already
made for himself a name and fame in the town, and the antagonistic
jealousy of the resident professors could not cope therewith, without
being worsted; they had given him up, and now let him alone,--thus his
sensitive nature was less attacked, and his energy had livelier play.
When the class divided, Miss Benette looked round at me: "I am at your
service, Master Auchester."

I gave her my mother's message. She was sweet and calm as ever, but
still grave, and she said, "I am very grateful to your mother, and to
those young ladies your sisters; but I never do go anywhere out to
tea."

"But, Miss Benette, you are going to that party at the Redferns'."

"I am going to sing there,--that is different. It is very hard to me
not to come, but I must not, because I have laid it upon myself to do
nothing but study until I come out. Because, you see, if I make
friends now, I might lose them then, for they might not like to know
me."

"Miss Benette!"--I stamped my foot--"how dare you say so? We should
always be proud to know you."

"I cannot tell that," she retorted; "it might be, or it might not.
Perhaps you will think I am right one day. I should like to have
come," she persisted bewitchingly. But I was inwardly hurt, and I
daresay she thought me outwardly sulky, for it was all I could do to
wish her good-evening like a "young gentleman," as she had called me.

I said to Millicent, when we were walking the next morning, that I had
had my fortune told. We had a long conversation. I saw she was very
anxious to disabuse me of the belief that I must necessarily be what,
in myself, I had always held myself ready to become, and I laughed her
quite to scorn.

"But, Charles," she remonstrated, "if this is to be, you must be
educated with a direct view to those purposes."

"So I shall be; but when she said medicine she did not mean I should
be an apothecary, Millicent," and I laughed the more.

"No, I rather think it is music you ought to profess. But in that case
you will require high as well as profound instruction."

"I mean to profess an instrument, and I mean to go to Germany and
learn all about it."

"My dear boy!"

"Yes, I do, and I know I shall; but as I have not chosen my instrument
yet, I shall wait."

Millicent herself laughed heartily at this. "Would you like to learn
the horn, Charles? or the flute? or perhaps that new instrument, the
ophicleide?" And so the subject dwindled into a joke for that while. I
then told her in strict confidence about Laura. I scarcely ever saw
her so much excited to interest; she evidently almost thought Clara
herself angelic, and to my delight she at length promised to call with
me upon her, if I would ascertain that it would be convenient. I shall
never forget, too, that Millicent begged for me from my mother some
baked apples, some delicate spiced jelly, and some of her privately
concocted lozenges, for Laura. I do think my mother would have liked
to dispense these last _à la largesse_ among the populace. I carried
these treasures in a small basket to Miss Benette, and saw her just
long enough to receive her assurance that she should be so pleased if
my sister would come and look at her work.

Sweet child! as indeed she was by the right of Genius (who, if Eros be
immortal youth, hath alone immortal fancy),--she had laid every piece
of her beauteous work, every scrap of net or cambric, down to that
very last handkerchief, upon the table, which she had covered with a
crimson shawl, doubtless some relic of her luxurious mother conserved
for her. And with the instinct of that ideal she certainly created in
her life, she had interspersed the lovely manufactures with little
bunches of wild-flowers and green, and a few berries of the wild
rose-tree, ripe and red.

I was enchanted. I was proud beyond measure to introduce to her my
sister; proud of them both. Millicent was astonished, amazed; I could
see she was quite puzzled with pleasure, but more than all she seemed
lost in watching Clara's calm, cloudless face.

"Which of the pieces do you like best?" asked Miss Benette at last,
after we had fully examined all.

"Oh! it is really impossible to say; but if I could prefer, I should
confess, perhaps, that this is the most exquisitely imagined;" and
Millicent pointed to a veil of thin white net, with the border worked
in the most delicate shades of green floss silk, a perfect wreath of
myrtle-leaves; and the white flowers seemed to tremble amidst that
shadowy garland. I never saw anything to approach them; they were far
more natural than any paintings.

Miss Benette took this veil up in her little pink hands, and folding
it very small, and wrapping it in silver paper, presented it to
Millicent, saying, in a child-like but most touching manner, "You must
take it, then, that you may not think I am ungrateful; and I am so
glad you chose that."

As Millicent said, it would have been impossible to have refused her
anything. I quite longed to cry, and the tears stood in my
tender-hearted sister's eyes; but Clara seemed entirely unconscious
she had done anything touching or pretty or complete.

If I go on in this way, raking the embers of reminiscence into rosy
flames, I shall never emancipate myself into the second great phase of
my existence. It is positively necessary that I should not revert to
that veil at present, or I should have to delineate astonishment and
admiration that had no end.




CHAPTER XIX.


At last the day came, and having excited myself the whole morning
about the Redferns, I left off thinking of them, and returned to
myself. Although it portends little, I may transmit to posterity the
fact that my new clothes came home at half-past three, and my mother
beheld me arrayed in them at five. Davy had all our parts and the
songs of Miss Benette, for she was to sing alone if requested to do
so, and was to be ready, when I should call, to accompany me.

I was at length pronounced at liberty to depart,--that is, everybody
had examined me from head to foot. I had a sprig of the largest myrtle
in the greenhouse quilted into the second and third button-holes, and
my white gloves were placed in my pocket by Clo, after she had wrapped
them in white paper. I privately carried a sprig of myrtle, too, for
Miss Benette: it was covered with blossom, and of a very fine species.
Thoné never answered the door in St. Anthony's Lane, but invariably
the same extraordinary figure who had startled me on my first visit.
She stared so long with the door in her hand, this time, that I rushed
past her and ran up the stairs.

Still singing! Yes, there she was, in her little bonnet, but from head
to foot enveloped in a monstrous cloak; I could not see what dress she
wore. It was November now, and getting very dusk; but we had both
expressed a wish to walk, and Davy always preferred it. How curious
his shell looked in the uncertain gleam! The tiny garden, as
immaculate as ever, wore the paler shine of asters and Michaelmas
daisies; and the casement above, being open, revealed Davy watching
for us through the twilight. He came down instantly, sweeping the
flower-shrubs with his little cloak, and having locked the door and
put the key into his pocket, he accosted us joyously, shaking hands
with us both. But he held all the music under his cloak too, nor would
I proceed until he suffered me to carry it. We called for Mr. Newton,
our companion tenor, who lived a short way in the town. He met us with
white gloves ready put on, and in the bravery of a white waistcoat,
which he exhibited through the opening of his jauntily hung
great-coat. I left him behind with Davy, and again found myself with
Miss Benette. I began to grow nervous when, having passed the shops
and factories of that district, we emerged upon the Lawborough Road,
lit by a lamp placed here and there, with dark night looming in the
distant highway. Again we passed house after house standing back in
masses of black evergreen; but about not a few there was silence, and
no light from within. At length, forewarned by rolling wheels that had
left us far behind them, we left the gate of the Priory and walked up
to the door.

It was a very large house, and one of the carriages had just driven
off as Davy announced his name. One of three footmen, lolling in the
portico, aroused and led us to a room at the side of the hall,
shutting us in. It was a handsome room, though small, furnished with a
looking-glass; here were also various coats and hats reposing upon
chairs. I looked at myself in the glass while Davy and our tenor gave
themselves the last touch, and then left it clear for them. I
perceived that Miss Benette had not come in with us, or had stayed
behind. She had taken off her bonnet elsewhere, and when we were all
ready, and the door was opened, I saw her once more, standing
underneath the lamp. I could not find out how she was dressed; her
frock was, as usual, black silk, but of the very richest. She wore
long sleeves, and drooping falls upon her wrists of the finest black
lace; no white against her delicate throat, except that in front she
had placed a small but really magnificent row of pearls. Her silky
dark hair she wore, as usual, slightly drooped on either temple, but
neither curled nor banded. I presented her with the myrtle sprig,
which she twisted into her pearls, seeming pleased with it; but
otherwise she was very unexcited, though very bright. I was not
bright, but very much excited; I quite shook as we walked up the soft
stair-carpet side by side. She looked at me in evident surprise.

"You need not be nervous, Master Auchester, I assure you!"

"It is going into the drawing-room, and being introduced, I hate; will
there be many people, do you think?"

She opened her blue eyes very wide when I asked her, and then, with a
smile quite new to me upon her face, a most enchanting but sorely
contemptuous smile, she said,--

"Oh! we are not going in there,--did you think so? There is a separate
room for us, in which we are to sip our coffee."

I was truly astonished, but I had not time to frame any expression; we
were ushered forward into the room she had suggested. It was a sort of
inner drawing-room apparently, for there were closed folding-doors in
the wall that opposed the entrance. An elegant chandelier hung over a
central rosewood table; on this table lay abundance of music,
evidently sorted with some care. Two tall wax-candles upon the
mantelshelf were reflected in a tall mirror in tall silver sticks; the
gold-colored walls were pictureless, and crimson damask was draperied
and festooned at the shuttered window. Crimson silk chairs stood
about, and so did the people in the room, whom we began, Clara and I,
to scrutinize. Standing at the table by Davy, and pointing with a
white kid finger to the music thereon arranged, was an individual with
the organs of melody and of benevolence in about equal development; he
was talking very fast. I was sure I knew his face, and so I did. It
was the very Mr. Westley who came upon us in the corridor at the
festival. He taught the younger Miss Redferns, of whom there was a
swarm; and as they grew they were passed up to the tuition of Monsieur
Mirandos, a haughtily-behaved being, in the middle of the rug, warming
his hands, gloves and all, and gazing with the self-consciousness of
pianist primo then and there present. It was Clara who initiated me
into this fact, and also that he taught the competent elders of that
exclusively feminine flock, and that he was the author of a grand
fantasia which had neither predecessor nor descendant. Miss Benette
and I had taken two chairs in the corner next the crimson curtain, and
nestling in there we laughed and we talked.

"Who is the man in a blue coat with bright buttons, now looking up at
the chandelier?" I inquired.

"That is a man who has given his name an Italian termination, but I
forget it. He has a great name for getting up concerts, and I daresay
he will be a sort of director to-night."

So it was, at least so it seemed, for he at last left the room, and
returning presented us each with a sheet of pink-satin note-paper, on
which were named and written in order the compositions awaiting
interpretation. We looked eagerly to see where our first glee came.

"Oh! not for a good while, Master Auchester. But do look, here is that
Mirandos going to play his _grande fantaisie sur des motifs
militaires_. Oh! who is that coming in?"

Here Miss Benette interrupted herself, and I, excited by her accent,
looked up simultaneously.

As for me, I knew directly who it was, for the gentleman entering at
the door so carelessly, at the same time appearing to take in the
whole room with his glance, had a violin-case in his hand. I shall not
forget his manner of being immediately at home, nodding to one and
another amiably, but with a slight sneer upon his lip, which he
probably could not help, as his mouth was very finely cut. I felt
certain it was Santonio; and while the gentleman upon the rug
addressed him very excitedly, and received a cool reply, though I
could not hear what it was, for all the men were talking, Davy came up
to us and confirmed my presentiment.

"What a handsome gentleman he is, but how he stares!" said Clara, in a
serious manner that set me laughing; and then Davy whispered "Hush!"

But it was of little use, for Santonio came up now to our corner, and
deposited his case on the next chair to Miss Benette, looking at her
all the while and at me, so that we could well see his face. It was
certainly very handsome,--a trifle too handsome, perhaps, yet full of
harmonious lines, and the features were very pure. His complexion was
glowing, yet fair, and passed well by contrast into the hue of his
eyes, which were of that musical gray more blue than slate-colored.
Had he been less handsome, the Hebrew contour might have been more
easily detected; as it was, it was clear to me, but might not have
occurred to others who did not look for it. A brilliant person, such
as I have seldom seen, he yet interested more by his gestures, his way
of scanning, and smiling to himself, his defiant self-composure,
something discomposing to those about him, than by his positive
personal attractions. Having examined us, he examined also Davy, and
said specially, "How are you?"

"Quite well, thank you," replied our master; "I had no right to expect
you would remember me, Mr. Santonio."

"Oh! I never forget anybody," was the reply; "I often wish I did, for
I have seen everybody now, and there is no one else to see."

"Oh!" thought I to myself, but I said nothing, "you have not seen
_one_." For I felt sure, I knew not why, that he had not.

"Is this your son, Davy?" questioned he, once more speaking, and
looking down upon me for an instant.

"Certainly not; my pupil and favorite alto."

"Is he for the profession, then?"

"What do you say, Charles?"

"Yes, Mr. Davy, certainly."

"If I don't mistake, it will not be alto long, though," said Santonio,
with lightness; "his arm and hand are ready made for me."

I was so transported that I believe I should have knelt before
Santonio but that, as lightly as he had spoken, he had turned again
away. It was as if he had not said those words, so unaltered was his
face, with those curved eyebrows; and I wished he had left me alone
altogether, I felt so insignificant. It was a good thing for me that
now there entered footmen very stately, with silver trays, upon which
they carried coffee, very strong and cold, and chilly green tea. We
helped ourselves, every one, and then it was I really began to enjoy
the exclusion with which we had been visited; for we all seemed shut
in and belonging to each other. The pianist primo joked with Santonio,
and Mr. Westley attacked Davy, while Newton and the man in the blue
coat with bright buttons wore the subject of the festival to a thread;
for the former had been away, and the latter had been there, and the
latter enlightened the former, and more than enlightened him, and
where his memory failed, invented, never knowing that I, who had been
present, was listening and judging,--as Clara said, "he was making up
stories;" and indeed it was a surprise for me to discover such an
imagination dwelling in a frame so adipose.

Santonio at last attracted our whole attention by pouring his coffee
into the fire, and asking a footman, who had re-entered with wafers
and tea-cakes, for some more coffee that was hot; and while we were
all laughing very loud, another footman, a shade more pompous than
this, threw back the folding-doors that divided us from the
impenetrable saloon. As those doors stood open we peeped in.

"How many people there are!" said I.

"Yes," said Clara, "but they are not very wise."

"Why do you suppose not?"

"First, because they have set the piano close up against the wall. Mr.
Davy will have it out, I know."

"I see a great many young ladies in pink frocks,--I suppose the Miss
Redferns."

"See that man, Master Auchester, who is looking down at the legs of
the piano, to find out how they are put on."

And thus we talked and laughed until Santonio had finished his coffee,
quite as if no one was either in that room or in the next.

"It was not warm, after all," said he to Mirandos; but this was in a
lower tone, and he put on an air of hauteur withal that became him
wonderfully. Then I found that we had all become very quiet, and there
had grown a hush through the next room, so that it looked like a vast
picture, of chandeliers all light, tall glasses, ruddy curtains, and
people gayly yet lightly dressed. The men in there spoiled the
picture, though,--they none of them looked comfortable: men seldom do
in England at an evening party. Our set, indeed, looked comfortable
enough, though Davy was a little pale; I very well knew why. At last
in came the footman again; he spoke to the gentleman in the blue coat
with bright buttons. _He_ bowed, looked red, and walked up to Davy.
Miss Benette's song came first, I knew; and I declare the blood quite
burned at my heart with feeling for her. How little I knew her really!
Almost before I could look for her, she was gone from my side; I
watched her into the next room. She walked across it just as she was
used to cross her own little lonely room at home, except that she just
touched Davy's arm. As she had predicted, he drew the piano several
feet from the wall,--it was a grand piano--and she took her place by
him. As serenely, as seriously, with that bright light upon her face
which was as the sunshine amidst those lamps, she seemed, and I
believe was, as serene, as serious, as when at home over her exquisite
broidery. No music was before Davy as he commenced the opening
symphony of one of Weber's most delighting airs. The public was just
fresh from the pathos of Weber's early death, and everybody rushed to
hear his music. She began with an intensity that astonished even
me,--an ease that so completely instilled the meaning that I ceased to
be alarmed or to tremble for her. Her voice even then held promise of
what it has since become, as perfectly as does the rose-bud, half
open, contain the rose. I have seen singers smile while they sang; I
have watched them sing with the tears upon their cheeks: yet I never
saw any one sing so seriously as Miss Benette, calmly, because it is
her nature, and above all, with an evident facility so peculiar that I
have ceased to reverence conquered difficulties so much as I believe I
ought to do for the sake of art. Everybody was very quiet, quieter
than at many public concerts; but this audience was half stupefied
with curiosity, as well as replete with the novelty of the style
itself. Everybody who has enthusiasm knows the effect of candle-light
upon the brain during the performance of music anywhere, and just as
we were situated there was a strange romance, I thought. Santonio
stood upon the rug; a very sweet expression sat upon his lips,--I
thought even _he_ was enchanted; and when Clara was silent and had
come back again so quietly, without any flush upon her face, I thought
he would surely come too and compliment her. But no, he was to play
himself, and had taken out his violin.

It was a little violin, and he lifted it as if it had been a flower or
an infant, and laid his head lovingly upon it while he touched the
strings. They, even those pizzicato hints, seemed to me to be sounds
borne out of another sphere, so painfully susceptible I became
instantly to the power of the instrument itself.

"It is to be the Grand Sonata, I see."

"No, sir," said Davy, who had come back with Miss Benette.

"Yes, but I shall not play with Mirandos; we settled that, Miss
Lawrence and I."

"Who is Miss Lawrence?"

"An ally of mine."

"In the room?"

"Yes, yes. Don't talk, Davy; she is coming after me. Your servant,
Miss Lawrence!"

I beheld a young lady in the doorway.

"So, Mr. Santonio, you are not ready? They are all very impatient for
a sight of you."

"I am entirely at your service."

"Come, then."

She beckoned with her hand. It was all so sudden that I could only
determine the color of her hair, black; and of her brocaded dress, a
dark blue. Her voice was in tone satirical, and she spoke like one
accustomed to be obeyed. When Santonio entered, there began a buzzing,
and various worthies in white kid gloves clustered round the piano. He
drew the desk this side of the instrument, so that not only his back
was turned to us, but he screened Miss Lawrence also; and I was
provoked that I could see nothing but the pearls that were twisted
with her braided hair. It was one of Beethoven's complete works to be
interpreted, a divine duo for violin and piano, that had then never
been heard in England, except at the Philharmonic concerts; and I did
not know the name even then of the Philharmonic. And when it began, an
indescribable sensation of awe, of bliss, of almost anguish, pervaded
me,--it was the very bitter of enjoyment; but I could not realize it
for a long time.

The perfection of Santonio's bowing never tempted him to eccentricity,
and no one could have dreamed of comparing him with Paganini, so his
fame was safe. But I knew nothing of Paganini, and merely felt from
head to foot as if I were the violin and he was playing upon me, so
completely was I drawn into the performance, body and soul,--not the
performance merely, let me say; as a violinist now, my conviction is
that the influence is as much physical as supernatural of my adopted
instrument. That time my nerves were so much affected that I trembled
in every part of me. Internally I was weeping, but my tears overflowed
not my eyes.

Santonio's _cantabile_, whatever they say of Ernst or of Sivori, is
superior to either. There is a manly passion in his playing that never
condescends to coquette with the submissive strings; it wailed enough
that night for anything, and yet never degenerated into imitation. I
knew directly I heard him draw the first quickening, shivering
chord--shivering to my heart--I knew that the violin must become my
master, or I its own.

Davy, still pale, but radiant with sympathetic pleasure, continued to
glance down upon me, and Clara's eyes were lost in drooping to the
ground. I scarcely know how it was, but I was very inadvertent of the
pianoforte part, magnificently sustained as it was and inseparable
from the other, until Clara whispered to Davy, "Does she not play
remarkably well, sir?"

"Yes," he returned; "I am surprised. She surely must be professional."
But none of us liked to inquire, at least then.

I noticed afterwards, from time to time, how well the piano met the
violin in divided passages, and how exactly they went together; but
still those strings, that bow, were all in all for me, and Santonio
was the scarcely perceptible presence of an intimate sympathy, veiled
from me as it were by a hovering mist of sound. So it was especially
in the slow movement, with its long sighs, like the voice of silence,
and its short, broken sobs of joy. The thrill of my brain, the deep
tumult of my bosom, alone prevented me from tears, just as the rain
falls not when the wind is swelling highest, but waits for the
subsiding hush. The analogy will not serve me out, nevertheless, for
at the close of the last movement, so breathless and so impetuous as
it was, there was no hush, only a great din, in the midst of which I
wept not; it was neither time nor place. Miss Benette, too, whispered
just at the conclusion, when Santonio was haughtily, and Miss Lawrence
carelessly, retiring, "Now we shall go; but please do not make me
laugh, Master Auchester."

"How can you say so, when it was your fault that we laughed the other
night?"

And truly it did seem impossible to unsettle that sweet gravity of
hers, though it often unsettled mine.




CHAPTER XX.


We went, and really I found it not so dreadful; and so was I drawn to
listen for her voice so dear to me even then, that I forgot all other
circumstances except that she was standing by me there, singing. I
sang very well,--to my shame if it be spoken, I always know when I do;
and the light color so seldom seen on Davy's cheek attested his
satisfaction. Davy himself sang alone next, and we were cleared off
every one, while he sang so beautiful a bass solo, in its delicacy and
simplicity, as I had ever heard. Clara and I mutually agreed to be
very nervous for our master. I am sure he was so, but nobody could
have told it of him who did not know him inside and out,--not even
Santonio, who, standing on the rug again, and turning down his
wristbands, which had disappeared altogether while he played, said to
Mirandos, "He seems very comfortable," meaning Davy. Then came a
quartet, and we figured again.

I was not glad to feel the intermitting tenor supplant that soprano.
Truly, it seemed that the higher Clara sang, the nearer she got to
heaven. The company applauded this quartet, mere thready tissue of
sweet sounds as it was--Rossini's--more than even Santonio's violin;
but twenty years ago there had been no universal deluge of education,
as I have lived to see since, and, at least in England in the midland
counties, people were few who could make out the signs of musical
genius so as to read them as they ran. Perhaps it was better that the
musician then only sought for sympathy among his own kind.

I knew Mirandos, and his fantasia came next, and hastily retreated,
pulling Miss Benette by her dress to bring her away too; for I had a
horror of his spreading hands. Santonio, impelled I daresay by the
small curiosity which characterizes great minds in the majority of
instances, came on the contrary forwards, and stood in the doorway to
watch Mirandos take his seat. I could see the sneer settle upon his
lips, subtle as that was; and I should have liked to stand and watch
him, for I am fond of watching the countenances of artists in their
medium moments, when I saw that Miss Benette had stolen to the fire,
and was leaning against the mantelshelf her infantine forehead. Her
attraction was strongest; I joined her.

"Now," said I, "if it were not for Santonio, would you not find this
evening very dull?"

"It is not an evening at all, Master Auchester, it is a candle-light
day; and so far from finding it dull, I find it a great deal too
bright. I could listen forever to Mr. Davy's voice."

"What can it be that makes his voice so sweet, when it is such a deep
voice?"

"I know it is because he has never sung in theatres. It does make a
deep voice rough to sing in theatres, unless a man does not begin to
sing so for a long, very long time."

"Miss Benette, is that the reason you do not mean to sing in
theatres?"

"No; but it is the reason I sing so much in my little room."

"Mr. Davy says you don't mean to act."

"No more I do mean, but perhaps it will come upon me, and Thoné says,
'Child, you must.'"

"She thinks you have a special gift, then?"

"Who said to you about the special gift, Master Auchester? Do you ever
forget anything you hear?"

"Never! I am like Mr. Santonio. But Mr. Davy told me the night I asked
him your name."

"Oh, yes, I told him I had not a special gift. I thought the words so
put together would please him, and I like to please him, he is good. I
do not think it is a special gift, you know, Master Auchester, to
act."

"What is it then, Miss Benette?"

"An inspiration."

"Mr. Davy called the conducting at the festival inspiration."

"Oh, yes; but all great composers are inspired."

"Do you consider our conductor was a great composer?"

"I daresay; but you must not ask me, I am not wise. Thoné is very
wise, and she said to me the other day, after you were gone, 'He is
one of us.'"

"But, Miss Benette, she is a gypsy, and I am not."

"We are not all alike because we are one. Can there be music without
many combinations, and they each of many single sounds?"

Mirandos was putting on the pedal, and we paused at this moment, as he
paused before the _attacca_. Santonio still remained in the doorway,
and Davy was standing in the window against the crimson curtain,
listening, and quite white with distress at the performance; for the
keys every now and then jangled furiously, and a storm of _arpeggi_
seemed to endanger the very existence of the fragile wires.

Suddenly a young lady swept past Santonio, and glanced at Davy in
passing into our retreat. Santonio, of course, did not move an inch;
certainly there was just room enough to clear him! But Davy fell back
into the folds of the curtain, frowning, not at the young lady, but at
the fantasia.

It was Miss Lawrence; and lo! before I could well recognize her, she
stepped up to me and said, without a bow or any introductory flourish,
"Are you Mr. Davy's pupil?"

"We are both, ma'am," I answered foolishly, half indicating Miss
Benette, who was bending her lashes into the firelight. Miss Lawrence
replied lightly, yet seriously,--

"Oh, I know _she_ is, but you first, because I knew you again."

I gazed upon her at this crisis. She had a peculiar face, dark yet
soft; and her eye was very fine, large, and half closed, but not at
all languid. Her forehead spread wide beneath jetty hair as smooth as
glass, and her mouth was very satirical,--capable of sweetness, as
such mouths alone are, though the case is often reversed. How
satirical are some expressions that slumber in sweetness too exquisite
to gaze on! And as for this young lady's manner, very easy was she,
yet so high as to be unapproachable, unless she first approached you.
Her accent was polished, or her address would have been somewhat
brusque; as it was, it only required, not requested, a reply. She went
on all this time, though,--

"I saw you in the chorus at the festival, and I watched you well; and
I saw you run out and return with that water-glass I envied you in
bearing. I hope you thought yourself enviable?"

"I certainly did not, because I could not think of myself at all."

"That is best! Now will you--that is, can you--tell me who the
conductor was?"

I forgot who she was, and imploringly my whole heart said, "Oh, do
pray tell us! We have tried and tried to find out, and no one knows."

"No one knows, but I _will_ know!" and she shook impatiently the rich
coral _négligée_ that hung about her throat. Again, with much
bitterness in her tones, she resumed, "I think it was cruel and unjust
besides not to tell us, that we at least might have thanked him. Even
poor St. Michel was groaning over his ignorance of such a
personage,--if indeed he be a wight, and not a sprite. I shall find a
witch next."

"Thoné!" I whispered to Clara, and her lips parted to smile, but she
looked not up.

And now a young man came in, out of the company, to look for Miss
Lawrence.

"Oh, is Miss Lawrence here?" said Santonio, carelessly turning and
looking over his shoulder to find her, though I daresay he knew she
was there well enough. However, he came up now and took his stand by
her side, and they soon began to talk. Rather relieved that the
responsibility was taken off myself, I listened eagerly.

It was fascinating in the extreme to me to see how Miss Lawrence
spurned the arm of the gentleman who had come to look for her and to
conduct her back; he was obliged to retire discomfited, and Santonio
took no heed of him at all. I could not help thinking then that Miss
Lawrence must have been everywhere and have seen everything, to be so
self-possessed, for I could quite distinguish between her
self-possession and Clara's,--the latter natural, the former acquired,
however naturally worn.

It was not long, nevertheless, before I received a shock. It was
something in this way. Miss Lawrence had reverted to the festival, and
she said to Santonio, "I had hopes of this young gentleman, because I
thought he belonged to the conductor, who spoke to him between the
parts; but he is as wise as the rest of us, and I can only say my
conviction bids fair to become my faith."

"Your conviction that you related to me in such a romantic narrative?"
asked Santonio, without appearing much interested. But he warmed as he
proceeded. "The wind was very poor at the festival, I heard."

"They always say so in London about country performances, you know,
either at least about the wind or the strings, or else one luckless
oboe is held up to ridicule, or a solitary flute, or a desolate
double-bass."

"But if the solitary flute or bass render themselves absurd, they
should be ridiculed far more in a general orchestra than in a
particular quartet or so, for the effect of the master-players thus
goes for nothing. I never yet heard a stringed force go through an
oratorio, and its violent exercises for the _tutti_, without falling
at least a tone."

"Oh, the _primi_ were very well! and in fact, had all been flat
together, it would have been unnoticeable; while the _tempi_ were
marked so clearly, no one had time to criticise and analyze. But the
organ had better have been quiet altogether; it would have looked very
well, and nobody would have known it was not sounding."

"I beg your pardon, every one would then have called out for more
noise."

"Not so, Mr. Santonio; there was quite body enough. But there sat
Erfurt, groping, as he always does, for the pedals, and punching the
keys, while the stops, all out, could very often not be got in in
time, and we had _fortissimo_ against the fiddles."

"I wonder your conductor did not give one little tap upon Erfurt's
skull. So much for his own judgment, Miss Lawrence."

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Santonio; the grand point was making all go
together, such as it was, so that no one realized a discrepancy
anywhere. Interruptions would not only have been useless, they would
have been ignorant; but in this person's strange intimacy with the
exigencies of a somewhat unsteady orchestra, his consummate triumph
was achieved."

"Well, I believe he will be found some time hence, in some
out-of-the-way hole, that shall deprive you all of enchantment."

"I do believe he is my wizard of Rothseneld."

"You are very credulous if you can so believe."

And they said much more. But what shocked me, had been the denuding
treatment of my all-glorious festival,--my romance of perfectibility,
my ideal world. How they talked--for I cannot remember the phrases
they strung into cold chains, at much greater length than I record--of
what had been for me as heaven outspread above in mystery and beauty,
and as a heaven-imaging deep beneath, beyond my fathom, yet whereon I
had exulted as on the infinite unknown! they making it instead a
reality not itself all lovely,--a revelation not itself complete. I
had not been mixed in the musical world; for there is such a world as
is not heaven, but earth, in the realm of tone, and tone-artists must
pass, as it were, through it. How few receive not from it some touch,
some taint of its clinging presence! How few, indeed, infuse into
it--while in it they are necessitated to linger--the spirit of their
heavenly home! Dimly, of a truth, had the life of music been then
opened to my ken; but it seemed at that moment again enclosed, and I
fell back into the first darkness. It was so sad to me to feel thus,
that I could not for an instant recover my faith in myself. I fancied
myself too insignificantly affected, and would, if I could, have
joined in the anti-spiritual prate of Miss Lawrence and Santonio. Let
me do them no injustice; they were both musicians, but I was not old
enough to appreciate their actual enthusiasm, as it were by mutual
consent a sealed subject between them.

I am almost tempted, after all, to say that it is best not to tamper
with our finest feelings,--best to keep silence; but let me
beware,--it is while we muse, the fire kindles, and we are then to
speak with our tongues. Let _them_ be touched too, though, with the
inward fire, or we have no right to speak.




CHAPTER XXI.


Oh, shame upon me, thus to ramble, when I should be restoring merely!

After the shock I mentioned, the best thing happened to me
possible,--we had to sing again; and Clara's voice arising, like the
souls of flowers, to the sun, became actually to me as the sun unto
those flowery souls. I revived and recovered my warmth; but now the
reaction had come, and I sang through tears. I don't know how my voice
sounded, but I felt it return upon me, and Davy grew rather nervous, I
knew, from his manner of accompanying. And I did not say that while
Miss Lawrence had stood and chatted with Santonio, a noiseless
_rentrée_ of footmen had taken place,--they bearing salvers loaded
with ices and what are called "creams" at evening parties.

A sort of interlude this formed, of which the guests availed
themselves to come and stare in upon us; and as they looked in we
peeped out, though nobody ventured on our side beyond the doorway. So
our duet had happened afterwards, and the music was to be resumed
until twelve o'clock, the supper-hour. And after our duet there was
performed this coda, that Miss Redfern requested Miss Lawrence to play
with her, and that Miss Lawrence refused, but consented, at Santonio's
suggestion, to play alone. As soon as she was seen past our
folding-door, the whole male squadron advanced to escort her to the
piano; but as she was removing her gloves leisurely, she waved them
off, and they became of no account whatever in an instant. She sat
down very still and played a brilliant prelude, a more than brilliant
fugue, short and sharp, then a popular air, with variations, few, but
finely fingered; and at last, after a few modulations, startling from
the hand of a female, something altogether new, something fresh and
mystical, that affected me painfully even at its opening notes. It was
a movement of such intense meaning that it was but one sigh of
unblended and unfaltering melody, isolated as the fragrance of a
single flower; and only the perfumes of Nature exhale a bliss as
sweet, how far more unexpressed! This short movement, that in its
oneness was complete, grew, as it were, by fragmentary harmonies
intricate, but most gradual, into another,--a _prestissimo_, so
delicately fitted, that it was like moonlight dancing upon crested
ripples; or for a better similitude, like quivering sprays in a summer
wind. And in less than fifty bars of regularly broken time--how
ravishingly sweet I say not--the first subject in refrain flowed
through the second, and they interwoven even as creepers and flowers
densely tangled, closed together simultaneously. The perfect command
Miss Lawrence possessed over the instrument did not in the least occur
to me; I was possessed but by one idea. Yet too nervous to venture
into that large room, I eagerly watched her, and endeavored to arrest
her eye, that I might beckon her among us again; so resolute was I to
ask her the name of the author. Santonio, as if really excited, had
made a sort of rush to her, and was now addressing her, but I heard
not what they said, though Davy did, for he had followed Santonio. To
my surprise, I saw that Miss Benette had taken herself into a corner,
and when I gazed upon her she was wiping her eyes. I was reminded
then that my own were running over.

Scarcely was I fit to look up again, having retreated to another
corner, when I beheld Miss Lawrence, in her blue brocade, come in and
look about her. She absolutely advanced to me.

"Did you like that little dream? That is my notion of the gentleman at
the festival, do you know."

"Did you compose it?" I asked in a maze.

"No, I believe he did."

"Then you know who he is? Tell me, oh! tell me the name."

She smiled then at me with kindness,--a beneficent sweetness. "Come,
sit down, and I will sit by you and tell you the story."

"May not Miss Benette come too?"

"Oh, certainly, if she is not more comfortable out there. I wish you
would bring her, though, for I want to see her eyes." I slipped over
the carpet. "Come, Miss Benette, and hear what Miss Lawrence is
saying." She looked a little more serious with surprise, but followed
me across the room and took the next chair beyond mine. Santonio came
up too, but Miss Lawrence said, "Go,--you have heard it before;" and
he, having to play again next, retired with careful dignity.

"You must know that once on a time,--which means about three months
ago,"--began Miss Lawrence, as if she were reading the introductory
chapter of a new novel, "I wanted some country air and some hard
practice. I cannot get either in London, where I live, and I
determined to combine the two. So I took a cottage in a lone part of
Scotland,--mountainous Scotland; but no one went with me except my
maid, and we took care together of a grand pianoforte which I hired
in Edinburgh, and carried on with me, van and all.

"It was glorious weather just then, and when I arrived at my cottage I
found it very difficult to practise, though very charming to play; and
I played a great deal,--often all the day until the evening, when I
invariably ascended my nearest hill, and inhaled the purest air in the
whole world. My maid went always with me; and at such seasons I left
my pianoforte sometimes shut, and sometimes open, as it happened, in
my parlor, which had a splendid prospect, and very wide windows
opening to the garden in front. I allowed these windows to remain open
always when I went out, and I have often found Beethoven's sonatas
strewed over the lawn when the wind blew freshly, as very frequently
it did. You may believe I often prolonged my strolls until the sun had
set and the moon arisen. So one time it happened, I had been at work
the whole day upon a crabbed copy of studies by Bach and Handel that
my music-seller had smuggled for me from an old bureau in a Parisian
warehouse,--for you must know such studies are rarely to be found."

"Why not?" asked I, rather abruptly, just as if it had been Millicent
who was speaking.

"Oh! just because they are rare practice, I suppose. But listen, or
our tale will be cut off short, as I see Santonio is about to play."

"Oh, make haste then, pray!"

And she resumed in a vein more lively.

"The whole day I had worked, and at evening I went out. The sunshine
had broken from dark, moist clouds all over those hills. The first
steep I climbed was profusely covered with honeysuckle, and the rosy
gold of the clusters, intermixed with the heather, just there a
perfect surface, pleased me so much that I gathered more than I could
well hold in both my arms. Victorine was just coming out,--that is, my
handmaid,--and I returned past her to leave my flowers at home. It
struck me first to throw them over the palings upon the little lawn,
but second thoughts determined me to carry them in-doors for a sketch,
or something. I got into my parlor by the glass door, and flung them
all, fresh as they were, and glimmering with rain-drops, upon the
music-stand of the pianoforte. I cannot tell you why I did it, but so
it was; and I had a fancy that they would be choice companions for
those quaint studies which yet lay open upon the desk.

"In that lone place, such was its beauty and its virtue, we never
feared to leave the windows open or the doors all night unlocked; and
I think it very possible I may have left the little gate of the front
garden swinging after me, for Victorine always latched it, as she came
last.

"At all events, I found her on the top of the honeysuckle height,
carrying a camp-stool and looking very tired. The camp-stool was for
her, as I always reposed on the grass, wrapped in a veritable tartan.
And this night I reposed a good deal to make a flying sunset sketch.
Then I stayed to find fault with my dry earth and wooden sky, and the
heather with neither gold nor bloom upon it; then to watch the shadows
creep up the hill, and then the moon, and then the lights in the
valley, till it was just nine o'clock. Slowly strolling home, I met
nobody except a shadow,--that is to say, as I was moving no faster
myself than a snail, I suddenly saw a long figure upon the ground flit
by me in the broad moonlight.

"'It was a gentleman in a cloak,' said Victorine. But I had seen no
person, only, as I have said, a shadow, and took no note.

"'He had a sketching-book like Mademoiselle's, and was pale,' added
Victorine. But I bade her be silent, as she was too fond of talking;
still, I replied, 'Everybody looks pale by moonlight,'--a fact to be
ascertained, if anywhere, on a moonlit moor.

"So I came home across the lawn, and got in at my window. I rang for
candles; it was not dark, certainly, but I wanted to play. I stood at
the window till the goodwife of the house, from her little kitchen,
brought them up. She placed them upon the piano, as I had always
ordered her to do, and left the room. After I had watched the
moonlight out of doors for some time, being lazy with that wild air, I
walked absently up to the instrument. What had taken place there?
Behold, the Bach and Handel, discarded, lay behind the desk, having
been removed by some careful hand, and on the desk itself, still
overhung with the honeysuckle and heather I had hastily tossed about
it, I found a sheet of music-paper. I could not believe my eyes for a
long time. It was covered with close, delicate composition, so small
as to fill a double page, and distinct as any printing. It had this
inscription, but no name, no notice else: 'Heather and Honeysuckle; a
Tone-wreath from the Northern Hills."'

"And that is what you played; oh, Miss Lawrence!" I cried, less in
ecstasy at the sum of the story than at my own consciousness of having
anticipated its conclusion.

"Yes, that is what I played, and what I very seldom do play; but I
thought you should hear it!"

"I!" I cried, much too loud under the circumstances; but I could not
have helped it. "It was very kind of you, but I don't know why you
should. But it is by _him_ then?"

"You have said!" answered Miss Lawrence, laughing,--"at least I think
so. And if you and I agree, no doubt we are right."

"No, I don't see that at all," I replied; for it was a thing I could
not allow. "I am only a little boy, and you are a great player, and
grown up. Besides, you saw his shadow."

"Do you think so? Well, I thought so myself, though it may possibly
have been the shadow of somebody else."

Miss Lawrence here stopped, that she might laugh; and as she laughed,
her deep eyes woke up and shone like fire-flies glancing, to and fro.
Very Spanish she seemed then, and very Jewish withal. I had never seen
a Spaniard I suppose then, but I conceive I had met with prints of
Murillo's "Flower-girl;" for her eyes were the only things I could
think of while Miss Lawrence laughed.

"At all events," she at last continued, "the 'Tone-wreath' is no
shadow." I was astonished here to perceive that Clara had raised her
eyes,--indeed, they looked fully into those of the speaker.

"He came from Germany, you can be sure at least."

"Why so, Miss Benette?" replied Miss Lawrence, graciously, but with a
slight deference very touching from one so self-sustained.

"Because it is only in that land they call music 'Tone.'"

"But still he may have visited Germany and listened to the
Tongedicht[11] of Beethoven; for _he_ is not so long dead." And she
sighed so deeply that I felt a deep passion indeed must have exhaled
that sigh. I got out of my chair and ran to Lenhart Davy, for I saw
him yet in the curtain. He detained me, saying, "My dear little boy,
do stay by me and sit a while, that you may grow calm; for verily,
Charles, your eyes are dancing almost out of your head. Besides, I
should like you to _see_ Mr. Santonio while he plays."

"Will he turn his face this way though, Mr. Davy? For he did not
before."

"I particularly requested him to do so, and he agreed, on purpose that
you might look at him." In fact, Santonio had taken up the gilt
music-stand, and very coolly turned it towards us, in the very centre
of the company, who shrank with awe from his immediate presence, and
left a circle round him. Then, as Mirandos, who had to play a trifling
negative accompaniment to the stringed solo, advanced to the piano,
the lord of the violin turned round and nodded at me as he himself
took his seat.

FOOTNOTE:

[11] Tone poem.




CHAPTER XXII.


We--that is, Miss Benette and Davy and I--came away from the Redferns
all in a hurry, just before supper, Santonio having informed us that
he intended to stay. He indeed, if I recollect right, took Miss
Lawrence down, and I have a dim remembrance of Mirandos poking
haughtily in the background. Also I remember our conversation on
returning home, and that Davy informed us Miss Lawrence was immensely
rich. She had lost her mother when a baby, he said; but I thought her
very far from pitiable,--she seemed to do so exactly as she pleased. I
had no idea of her age, and I did not think about it at all; but Miss
Benette said, "She is as independent as she is gifted, sir; and she
spoke to me like one who is very generous."

"Yes, I should think so," said Davy, cheerfully; "Santonio tells me
she is a pupil of Milans-André."

"Oh!" I cried, "how I wish I had known that."

"Why so, my dear boy?"

"Because I would have asked her what he is like,--I do so want to
know."

"She does not admire him so wonderfully, Santonio says, and soon tired
of his instructions. I suppose the fact is she can get on very well
alone."

"But I wish I had asked her, sir," I again said, "because we should be
quite sure about the conductor."

"But you forget Miss Lawrence was at the festival, Charles, and that
she saw you there. Come! my boy you are not vain."

"No, sir, I don't think I am. Oh! Miss Benette, you laughed!"

"Yes, Master Auchester, because you could be no more vain than I am."

"Why not, Miss Benette?"

"Because we could neither of us be vain, side by side with our
tone-master," she answered, with such a childlike single-heartedness
that I was obliged to look at Davy to see how he bore it. It was very
nearly dark, yet I could make out the lines of a smile upon his face.

"I am very proud to be called so, Miss Benette; but it is only a name
in my case, with which I am well pleased my pupils should amuse
themselves."

"Master Auchester," exclaimed Miss Benette, without reply to Davy at
all, "you can ask Miss Lawrence about Monsieur Milans-André, if you
please, for she is coming to see my work, and I think it will be
to-morrow that she will come."

"Oh, thank you, Miss Benette! I suppose Miss Lawrence said that to you
when Mr. Davy called me away to him?"

"I did not call you, Charles; you came yourself."

"But you kept me, sir,"--and it struck me on the instant that Davy's
delicate device ought not to have been touched upon; so I felt awkward
and kept silence.

I was left at home first, and promised Clara I would come, should my
mother and the weather agree to permit me. I was hurried to bed by
Clo, who had sat up to receive me. I was disappointed at not seeing
Millicent, with the unreasonableness which is exclusively fraternal;
but Clo informed me that my mother would not permit her to stay out of
bed.

"And, Charles, you must not say one word to-night, but eat this slice
of bacon and this egg directly, and let me take off your comforter."

The idea of eating eggs and bacon! I managed the egg, but it was all I
could do, and she then presented me with a cup of hot barley-water.
Oh! have you ever tasted barley-water, with a squeeze of lemon-juice,
after listening to the violin? I drank it off, and was just about to
make a rush at the door when Clo stopped me.

"My dear Charles, Margareth is gone up to bed; stay until I can light
you with my candle. And come into my room to undress, that you may not
wake my mother by throwing your brush down."

I was marched off impotent, she preceding me upstairs with a stately
step. But softly as we passed along, Millicent heard us; she just
opened a little bit of her door, and stooped to kiss me in her white
dressing-gown. "I have chosen my instrument," I said, in a whisper,
and she smiled. "Ah, Charles!"

I need not recapitulate my harangue the next morning when I came down
late and found only Millicent left to make my breakfast. I was
expected to be idle, and the rest had gone out to walk. But I
wondered, when I came to think, that I had been so careless as to omit
asking Clara the hour fixed for Miss Lawrence's visit,--though,
perhaps, was my after-thought, she did not know herself. I need not
have feared, though; for while I was lying about on the sofa after our
dinner, having been informed that I must do so, or I should not
practise in the evening, in came Margareth with a little white note
directed to "Master Charles Auchester."

"I am sure, Master Charles," said she, "you ought to show it to my
mistress, for the person that brought it was no servant in any family
hereabouts, and looks more like a gypsy than anything else."

"Well, and so it is a gypsy, Margareth. Of course I shall tell my
mother,--I know all about it."

Margareth wanted to know, I was sure, but I did not enlighten her
further; besides, I was in too great a hurry to break the seal,--a
quaint little impression of an eagle carrying in his beak an
oak-branch. The note was written in a hand full of character, yet so
orderly it made me feel ashamed. It was as follows:--

      DEAR SIR,--The young lady is here, and I said you wished to
      come. She has no objection, and will stay to see you.

        CLARA BENETTE.

"How like her!" I thought; and then, with an unpardonable impulse,--I
don't defend myself in the least,--I flew out of the house as if my
shoes had been made of satin. I left the note open upon the table (it
was in the empty breakfast-room where I had been lolling), meaning
thereby to save my credit,--like a simpleton as I was, for it
contained not one word of explanation.

A carriage was at the door of that corner house in St. Anthony's
Lane,--a dark-green carriage; very handsome, very plain, with a pair
of beautiful horses: the coachman, evidently tired of waiting, was
just going to turn their heads.

When I got into the room upstairs, or rather while yet upon the
stairs, I smelt some refined sort of foreign scent I had once before
met with in my experience; namely, when my mother had received a
present of an Indian shawl in an Indian box, from an uncle of hers who
had gone out to India and laid his bones there. When I really
entered, Miss Lawrence, in a chair by the table, was examining some
fresh specimens of Miss Benette's work outspread upon the crimson as
before. I abruptly wished Clara good-day, and immediately her visitor
held out her hand to me. This lady made me feel queer by daylight: I
could not realize, scarcely recognize, her. She looked not so
brilliant, and now I found that she was slightly sallow; her
countenance might have been called heavy, from its peculiar style.
Still, I admired her eyes, though I discerned no more fireflies in her
glance. She was dressed in a great shawl,--red, I think it was,--with
a black bonnet and feather; and her gloves were so loose, they seemed
as if they would fall off. She had an air of even more fashionable
ease than ever, and I, not knowing that it _was_ fashionable ease,
felt so abashed under its influence that I could not hold up my head.

She went on talking about the work. I found she wished to purchase
some; but Clara would not part with any of that which was upon the
table, because it was for the Quakers in Albemarle Square. But she was
very willing to work specially for Miss Lawrence. I thought I had
never seen Clara so calm,--I wondered she could be so calm; at once
she seemed to me like myself,--a child, so awfully grown-up did Miss
Lawrence appear. I beheld, too, that the latter lady glanced often
stealthily round and round the room, and I did not like her the better
for it. I thought she was curious, and very fine besides; so the idea
of asking her about Milans-André passed out of my brain completely.

She had, as I said, been discussing the work. She gave orders for
embroidered handkerchiefs, and was very particular about the flowers
to be worked upon them; and she gave orders for a muslin apron, to be
surrounded with vandykes, and to have vandyked pockets,--for a toilet
cushion and veil; and then she said: "Will you have the goodness to
send them to the Priory when they are finished? My friends live there,
and will send them on to me. I wish to pay for them now,"--and she
laid a purse upon the table.

"I think there is too much gold here, ma'am," said Clara, innocently.

"I know precisely the cost of work, Miss Benette: such work as yours
is, besides, priceless. Recollect, you find my materials. That is
sufficient, if you please." And to my astonishment, and rather dread,
she turned full upon me as I was standing at the table.

"You wish to know what Milans-André is like, Master Charles
Auchester,--for that is your name, I find. Well, thus much: he is not
like you, and he is not like Santonio, nor like the unknown conductor,
nor like your favorite, Mr. Davy. He is narrow at the shoulders, with
long arms, small white hands, and a handsome face,--rather too large
for his body. He plays wonderfully, and fills a large theatre with one
pianoforte. He is very amiable, but not kind; and very famous, but not
beloved."

"What an extraordinary description!" I thought; and I involuntarily
added: "I thought he was your master."

She seemed touched, and answered generously: "I am afraid you think me
ungrateful, but I owe nothing to him. Ah! you owe far more to your
master, Mr. Davy."

I was pleased, and replied, "Oh! I know that; but I should like to
hear Milans-André play."

"You will be sure to hear him. He will, ere long, become common, and
play everywhere. But if I had a piano here, I could show you exactly
how he plays, and could play you a piece of his music."

I thought it certainly a strange mistake in punctilio for Miss
Lawrence to refer to the want of a piano in that room; but I little
knew her. She paused, too, as she said it, and looked at Clara. Clara
did not blush, nor did her sweet face change.

"I am very sorry that I have no piano; I am to have one some day when
I grow rich. But Mr. Davy is kind enough to teach me at his house, and
I sing to his piano there. I wish I had one, though, that you might
play, Miss Lawrence."

The fire-flies all at once sparkled, almost dazzled, from the eyes of
Miss Lawrence: a sudden glow, which was less color than light, beamed
all over her face. I could tell she was enchanted about something or
other,--at least she looked so.

"Oh! Miss Benette," she answered, in a genial tone, "you are very,
very rich with such a voice as yours, and such power to make it
perfect as you possess."

Clara smiled. "Thank you for saying so." Miss Lawrence had risen to
go, yet she still detained herself, as having something left to do or
say.

"I should like to see you both again, and to hear you. You, Miss
Benette, I am sure of; but I also expect to discover something very
wonderful about Master Charles Auchester. You are to be a singer, of
course?" she quickly said to me.

"I hope I shall be a player, if I am to be anything."

"What, another Santonio, or another Milans-André?"

"Oh! neither; but I must learn the violin."

"Oh! is that it? Have you begun, and how long?"

"Not yet,--I have no violin; but I mean to begin very soon."

"Only determine, and you will. Farewell!"

She had passed out, leaving a purse upon the table, containing fifty
guineas. Miss Benette opened it, turned out the coins one by one, and,
full of trouble, said, "Oh! whatever shall I do? I shall be so unhappy
to keep it."

"But that is wrong, Miss Benette, because you deserve it. She is quite
right."

"No, but I will keep it, because she is generous, and I can see how
she loves to give."




CHAPTER XXIII.


Laura was at the next class. I had almost forgotten her until I saw
her eyes. I felt quite wicked when I perceived how thin and
transparent the child had grown,--wicked to have thought so little of
her in suffering, while I had been enjoying myself. I cannot give the
least idea how large her eyes looked,--they quite frightened me. I was
not used to see persons just out of illness. Her hair, too, was cut
much shorter, and, altogether, I did not admire her so much. I felt
myself again wicked for this very reason, and was quite unhappy about
it. She gave me a nod. Her cheeks were quite pale, and usually they
were very pink: this also affected me deeply. Clara appeared to
counter-charm me, and I saw no other immediately.

"Ah, Laura, dear! you are looking quite nice again, so pretty," said
this sweet girl as she took her seat; and then she stooped down and
kissed the little dancer.

I found myself rather in the way; for to Clara it seemed quite natural
to scatter happiness with her very looks. She turned to me, after
whispering with Laura:

"She wants to thank you for the flowers, but she does not like to
speak to you."

I was positively ashamed, and, to hide my confusion, said to Laura,
"Do you like violets?"

"Yes, but I like large flowers better. I like red roses and blue
cornflowers."

I did not care for cornflowers myself, except among the corn; and I
thought it very likely Laura took the poppies for roses; still, I did
not set her right,--it was too much trouble. But if I had known I
should never see her again,--I mean, see her as she then was,--I
should have taken more care to do her kindness. Is it not ever so?
Clara entirely engaged me; in fact, I was getting quite used _not_ to
do without her. How well I remember that evening! We sang a service.
Davy had written several very simple ones, and I longed to perform
them in public,--that is to say, in the singing gallery of our church.
But I might as well have aspired to sing them up in heaven, so utterly
would they have been spurned as innovatory.

It was this evening I felt for the first time what I suppose all boys
feel at one time or another,--that they cannot remain always just as
they are. It was no satiety, it was no disappointed hope, nor any
vague desire. It was purely a conviction that some change was awaiting
me. I suppose, in fact, it was a presentiment. The voices of our choir
seemed thin and far away; the pale cheek of Lenhart Davy seemed
stamped with unearthly lustre; the room and roof were wider, higher;
the evening colors, clustered in the shape of windows, wooed to that
distant sky. I was agitated, ecstatic. I could not sing; and when I
listened, I was bewildered in more than usual excitement. Snatches of
hymns and ancient psalms, morsels of the Bible, lullabies and bells,
speeches of no significance, uttered years and, as it seemed,
centuries ago, floated into my brain and through it, despite the
present, and made there a murmurous clamor, like the din of a mighty
city wafted to the ear of one who stands on a commanding hill. I
mention this to prove that presentiment is not a fatuity, but
something mysterious in its actuality,--like love, like joy; perhaps a
passion of memory, that anticipates its treasures and delights _to
be_.

"What beautiful words!" said Clara, in a whisper that seemed to have
more sweetness than other whispers, just as some shadows have more
symmetry than other shadows. She meant, "Unto whom I sware in my
wrath," and the rest.

"Yes," I answered, "I like those words, all of them, and the way they
are put. I always liked them when I was a little boy."

It was very hard to Miss Benette not to reply here, I could tell, she
so entirely agreed with me; but Davy was recalling our attention. When
the class was over, she resumed,--

"I know exactly what you mean; for I used to feel it at the old church
in London, where I went with Mr. Davy's aunt, and could not see above
the pew, it was so high."

"Did you like her, Miss Benette? Is she like him?"

"No, not much. She is a good deal stricter, but she is exceedingly
good; taller than he is, with much darker eyes. She taught me so much,
and was so kind to me, that I only wonder I did not love her a great
deal more."

I felt rather aghast, for, to tell the truth, I only wonder when I
love,--never when I am indifferent, as to most persons. As we were
going out, I asked leave to come and practise on the morrow,--I felt I
_must_ come. I wonder what I should have done had she refused me!
"Certainly, Master Auchester." But she was looking after Laura. "Let
me pin up that shawl, dear, and tie my veil upon your bonnet,--mind
you wear it down in the street." The child certainly seemed to have
put on her clothes in a dream, for her great shawl trailed a yard
behind her on the floor, and did not cover her shoulders at all. Her
bonnet-strings, now very disorderly indeed, were entangled in a knot,
which Clara patiently endeavored to divide. I waited as long as I
dared, but Davy was staying for me I knew, and at last he waved his
hand. I could no longer avoid seeing him, and said to Clara,
"Good-night." She smiled, but did not rise; she was kneeling before
Laura. "Good-night, Miss Lemark."

She only looked up. The large eyes seemed like the drops of rain after
a drenching shower within the chalice of some wood anemone,--too heavy
for the fragile face in which they were set, and from which they gazed
as if unconscious of gazing. I thought to myself, as I went out, she
will die, I suppose; but I did not tell Davy so, because of his reply
when I had first spoken of Laura's illness. I felt very dispirited
though, and shrank from the notion, though it still obtruded itself.
Davy was very quiet. I recollect it to have been a white foggy night,
and more keen than cold: perhaps that was the reason, as he was never
strong in health. When I came to our door--how well I remember it!--I
pulled him in upon the mat before he well knew what I was about.

"Oh! Master Charles," exclaimed Margareth, who was exclusive porteress
in our select establishment, "your brother has brought you a
parcel,--a present, no doubt."

"Oh! my goodness; where is Fred?"

"They are all in the parlor. But, sir, won't you walk in?"

"I beg your pardon," said Davy, absently. "Oh! no; I am going back.
Good-night, Charles."

"Oh, dear, Mr. Davy, do stay and see my present, please!"

Davy did not answer here, for the parlor door opened, and my mother
appeared, benign and hospitable.

"Come in, come in!" she said, extending her hand, and I at least was
in before she was out of the parlor. Fred was there, and Fred's
wife--a pretty black-haired little matron, full of trivialities and
full of sympathy with Lydia--was sitting by that respected sister at a
little table. I ran to shake hands with Mrs. Fred, and knocked over
the table. Alas! they were making bead purses, and for a few moments
there was a restoration of chaos among their elements. Clo came from a
dark corner, where she was wide awake over Dean Prideaux, and my
mother had raised her hands in some dismay, when I was caught up by
Fred and lifted high into the air.

"Well, and what do I hear," etc.

"Oh! Fred, where is my present?"

"Present, indeed! Such as it is, it lies out there. _Nobody_ left it
at the office, so Vincent tells me; but I found it there among the
packages, and was strongly inclined to consider it a mistake
altogether. Certainly 'Charles Auchester, Esq.,' was not 'known
there;' but I smelt plum-cake, and that decided me to have it opened
here."

I rushed to the chair behind the sofa, while the rest--except
Millicent and Mr. Davy, who were addressing each other in the low
voice which is the test of all human proprieties--were scolding in
various styles. The fracas was no more to me than the jingling of the
maternal keys. I found a large oblong parcel rolled in the thickest of
brown papers, and tied with the thickest of strings round and round
again so firmly that it was, or appeared to be, hopeless to open it
unless I gnawed that cord.

"Oh! Lydia, lend me your scissors."

"For shame, Charles!" pronounced Clo. "How often have I bidden you
never to waste a piece of string!"

She absolutely began upon those knots with her fingers. My own
trembled so violently that they were useless. Meanwhile, for she was
about ten minutes engaged in the neat operation,--I scanned the
address. It was, as Fred had mentioned to me, as an adult and as an
esquire, and the writing was bold, black, and backward. It seemed to
have come a long way, and smelt of travelling; also, when the paper
was at length unfolded, it smelt of tow, and something oblong was
muffled in the tow.

"A box!" observed sapient Clotilda. I tore the tow out in handfuls.
"Don't strew it upon the carpet, oh, my dearest Charles!"

Clo, I defy you! It was a box truly, but what sort of a box? It had a
lid and a handle. It was also fastened with little hooks of brass. It
was open, I don't know how. There it lay,--there lay a real violin in
the velvet lining of its varnished case!

No, I could not bear it; it was of no use to try. I did not touch it,
nor examine it. I flew away upstairs. I shut myself into the first
room I came to, which happened to be Lydia's; but I did not care. I
rushed up to the window and pressed my face against the cold glass. I
sobbed; my head beat like a heart in my brain; I wept rivers. I don't
suppose the same thing ever happened to any one else, therefore none
can sympathize. It was mystery, it was passion, it was infinitude; it
was to a soul like mine a romance so deep that it has never needed
other. My violin was mine, and I was it, and the beauty of my romance
was, in truth, an ideal charmer; for be it remembered that I knew no
more how to handle it than I should have known how to conduct at the
festival.

The first restoring fact I experienced was the thin yet rich vibration
of that very violin. I heard its voice, somebody was trying it,--Davy,
no doubt; and that marvellous quality of tone which I name a double
oneness--resulting, no doubt, from the so often treated
harmonics--reached and pierced me up the staircase and through the
closed door. I could not endure to go down, and presently when I had
begun to feel rather ghostly--for it was dead dark--I heard somebody
come up and grope first here, then there, overhead and about, to find
me. But I would not be found until all the places had been searched
where I did not happen to be hidden. Then the person came to my door.
It was Millicent; she drew me into the passage.

"Oh! I can't go down."

"Darling do, for my sake. They are all so pleased. Mr. Davy has been
playing, and he says it is a real Amati."

"But don't let Fred touch it, please, Millicent!" For I had a vague
idea it would not like to be touched by Fred.

"Why, no one _can_ touch it but Mr. Davy,--not even _you_, Charles. Do
come downstairs now and look at it."

I went. Mr. Davy was holding it yet, but the instant I entered he
advanced and placed it between my arms. I embraced it, much as young
ladies embrace their first wax dolls, but with emotions as sweet, as
deep, as mystical as those of the youth who first presses to his soul
the breathing presence of his earliest love. I saw then that this
violin was a tiny thing,--a very fairy of a fiddle; it was certainly
not new, but I did not know how very old it was, and should not have
been the least aware how valuable it was, and of what a precious
costliness, but for Davy's observation, "Take care of it, Charles, and
it will make you all you wish to be. I rather suspect Santonio will
envy you its possession when he has tried it."

"But is he to try it, then, Mr. Davy?"

"Your mother has given me leave to ask him, if I see him; but I fear
he has already returned to London." Davy glanced here at my mother
with a peculiar expression, and resumed, "I am going to write to him,
at all events, about another subject, or rather upon the same
subject."

"Oh, Mr. Davy, I will talk to my little boy myself."

"Certainly, madam; I will not anticipate you."

"Charles dear," said Clo, "you must have your supper now."

It appeared to me that I had already had it; but I restored my doll to
its cradle in silence, and ate unconsciously. Fred's presence at the
board stimulated his lady and Lydia to extreme festivity, and they
laughed the whole time; but Millicent was pale and Davy quiet, and he
departed as soon as he possibly might. But a smile of sweetness all
his own, and of significance sweeter than sweetness, brightened his
frank adieu for me into the day-spring of my decided destiny.




CHAPTER XXIV.


The next morning my mother redeemed her promise. It was directly after
breakfast when she had placed herself in the chair at the parlor
window. She made no allusion to the evening before until she completed
this arrangement of hers, and then she looked so serious, as I stood
before her, that I fully expected something I should not like.

"Charles," she said, "you are very dear to me, and perhaps you have
given me more care than all my children, though you are the youngest.
I have often wondered what you would be or become as a member of
society, and it was the last of all my thoughts for you that you must
leave me to be educated. But if you are to be a musician, you must be
taken from me soon, or you will never grow into what we should both of
us desire,--a first-rate artist. I could not wish you to be anything
less than first rate, and now you are very backward."

"Am I to go to London then, mother?" I shook in every limb.

"I believe a first-rate musical education for you in London would be
beyond my means. It is upon this subject your friend Mr. Davy is to be
so good as to write to Santonio, who can tell us all about Germany,
where higher advantages can be obtained more easily than anywhere in
England. But, Charles, you will have to give up a great deal if you
go, and learn to do everything for yourself. If you are ill, you will
have to do without nursing and petting as you would have here; and if
you are unhappy, you must not complain away from home. Also you must
work hard, or you will lose your free self-approval, and be miserable
at the end. I should be afraid to let you go if I did not know you are
musical enough to do your duty by music, and loving enough to do your
duty by your mother; also, that you are a true boy, and will not take
to false persons. But it is hard to part with you, my child; and
indeed, we need not think of that just yet."

I did though, I am ashamed to say; and I wanted to set off on the next
day. I knew this to be impossible, and the fact that consoled me was
the very one of my unstrung ignorance; for I had a vague impression
that Davy would tune me up before I left home. I could not see him
that morning. My excitement was intense; I could not even cut a caper,
for I had to do my lessons, and Clo always behaved about my lessons as
if they were to go on forever, and I was by no means to grow any
older. She was especially stationary on this morning, and I had
nothing for it but to apply very hard indeed. My copy was more crabbed
than ever; but while she commented so gravely thereupon, I thought of
what Santonio had said about my arm and hand. I was not vain,--I have
not a tincture of vanity all through me,--but I was very proud, and
also most demurely humble.

At dinner Millicent talked to me of my prospects; but I pretended not
to admit them in all their magnificence: the prophetic longing was so
painful to me that I dared not irritate it. So she rallied me in vain,
and I ate a great deal of rice pudding to simulate occupation. Dinner
over, they all retired to their rooms,--I to my violin in a corner of
the parlor. I hung over it as it lay in its case, I fed upon it in
spirit; but I did not take it out, I was afraid of any one coming in.
At last I spread my pocket-handkerchief upon the case, and sitting
down upon it, went to sleep in scarcely conscious possession. I did
not dream anything particular, though I suppose I ought to have done
so, and it had been better for these unilluminated pages; but when I
awoke it was late,--that is, late for my engagement with Miss Benette.

I ran all the way; and as I reached my resting-place, it occurred to
me that I should have to tell her I was going to Germany. How glad she
would be, and yet a little sorry; for I had an idea she liked me, or I
should never have gone near her. Vaulting into the passage, I heard
strange sounds--singing, but not only singing. More and more wonders,
I thought, and I dashed upstairs. The sounds ceased when I knocked at
the door, which Clara came to open. I gazed in first, before I even
noticed her, and beheld in the centre of the room a small polished
pianoforte. I flew in and up to it, and breathlessly surveyed it.

"Miss Benette, where did that come from? I thought you were not to
have a pianoforte for ever so long."

She came to me, and replied with her steady, sweet voice a little
agitated,--

"Oh! Master Auchester, I wish you could tell me who it came from, that
I might give that person my heart quite full of thanks. I can only
believe it comes from some one who loves music more than all
things,--some one rich, whom music has made richer than could all
money. It is such a sweet, darling, beautiful thing to come to me!
Such a precious glory to make my heart so bright!"

The tears filled her eyes, and looking at her, I perceived that she
had lately wept; the veins of harebell-blue seemed to quiver round the
lids.

"Oh, Miss Benette! I had a violin sent to me too, and I thought it was
from Mr. Davy; but now I feel quite sure it was from that lady."

Clara could scarcely speak,--I had never seen her so overcome; but she
presently answered,--

"I believe it was the young lady. I hope so, because I should like her
to be made happy by remembering we have both got through her what we
wanted more than anything in the world. She would not like to be
thanked, though; so we ought not to grieve that we cannot express our
gratitude."

"I should like to know really, though, because it seems so strange she
should recollect _me_."

"Oh, Master Auchester, no! Any one can see the music in your face who
has the music in his heart. Besides, she saw you at the festival, and
how anxious you were to serve the great gentleman."

"Now, Miss Benette, I am to tell you something."

"How good! Do go on."

I laid my arm on the piano, but scarcely knew how to begin.

"What is it to do, then?" asked Clara, winningly.

"I am going really to be a musician, Miss Benette; I am going to
Germany."

She did not reply at first; but when I looked up, it was as though she
had not wept, so bright she beamed.

"That's all right, I knew you would. Oh! if she knew how much good she
had done, how happy she would be! How happy she will be when she goes
to a concert some day, in some year to come, and sees you stand up,
and hears you praise music in the voice it loves best!"

"Do you think so? Do you think it is the best voice of music?"

"Because it is like the voice of a single soul, I do. But Mr. Davy
says we cannot know the power of an orchestra of souls."

"_I_ can."

"Oh! I beg your pardon! I forgot."

"But I don't think that I remember well; for whenever I try to think
of it, I seem only to see his face, and hear his voice speaking to me,
saying, 'Above all, the little ones!'"

"How pretty it was! You will be sure to see him in Germany, and then
you can ask him whether he wrote the 'Tone-Wreath.'"

Oh, how I laughed again!

"What sort of place shall I go to, should you think?"

"I don't know any place really, Master Auchester. I can't tell what
places they have to learn at, upon the Continent. I know no places
besides this house, and Mr. Davy's, and the class, and church, and
Miss Lenhart's house in London."

"Are you not very dull?"

Alas for the excitable nature of my own temperament! I was sure I
should be dull in her place, though I had never felt it until my
violin came upon me, stealthy and stirring as first love. She looked
at me with serene wonder.

"I don't know what 'dull' means. I do not want anything I have not
got, because I shall have everything I want,--some day, I mean; and I
would rather not have all at once."

I did not think anything could be wanting to her, indeed, in
loveliness or aspiration, for my religious belief was in both for her;
still I fancied it impossible she should not sometimes feel
impatient, and especially as those blue shadows I have mentioned had
softened the sweetness of her eyes, and the sensation of tears stole
over me as I gazed upon her.

"We shall not practise much, I am afraid, Master Auchester, for I want
to talk, and I am so silly that when I sing, I begin to cry."

"For pleasure, I suppose. I always do."

"Not all for pleasure. I am vexed, and I do not love myself for being
vexed. Laura is going to Paris, Master Auchester, to study under a
certain master there. Her papa is going too, and that woman I do not
like. She is unhappy to leave me, but they have filled her head with
pictures, and she is wild for the big theatres. She came to see me
this morning, and I talked to her a long time. It was that made me
cry."

"Why, particularly?"

"Because I told her so many things about the sort of people she will
see, and how to know what is beautiful in people who are not wise. She
promised to come and live with me when I have been to Italy, and
become a singer; but till then, I shall, perhaps, never meet her, for
our ways are not the same. She looked with her clear eyes right
through me, to see if I was grave; and if she only finds her art is
fair, I shall not be afraid for her."

"But is she not ill? I never saw anybody look so strange."

"That is because her hair is shorter. You do not like her, Master
Auchester?"

I shook my shoulders. "No; not a great deal."

"You will try, please. She will be an artist."

"But don't you consider,--of course I don't know,--but don't you
consider dancing the lowest art?"

"Oh, Master Auchester! all the arts help each other, and are all in
themselves so pure that we cannot say one is purer than the other.
Besides, was it not in the dream of that Jew, in the Bible, that the
angels descended as well as ascended?"

"You are like Martin Luther."

"Why so?"

"Clo--that is my clever sister--told me what he said about the arts
and religion."

"Oh, Mr. Davy tells that story."

"Miss Benette, you are very naughty! You seem to know everything that
everybody says."

"No; it is because I see so few people that I remember all they say."

"Are you not at _all_ fonder of music than of dancing? Oh, Miss
Benette!"

She laughed heartily, showing one or two of her twinkling teeth.

"I am fonder of music than of anything that lives or is, or rather I
am not fond of it at all; but it is my life, though I am only a young
child in that life at present. But I am rather fond of dancing, I must
confess."

"I think it is charming; and I can dance very well, particularly on
the top of a wall. But I do not care about it, you know."

"You mean, it is not enough for you to make you either glad or sorry.
But be thankful that it is enough for some people."

"All things make me glad, and sorry too, I think, going away now. When
I come back--"

"I shall be gone," said Clara.

"I shall be a man--"

"And I an old woman--"

"For shame, Miss Benette! you will never grow old, I believe."

"Oh, yes, I shall; but I do not mind, it will be like a summer to grow
old."

"I am sure it will!" I cried, with an enthusiasm that seemed to
surprise her, so unconscious was she ever of any effect she had.

"But I shall grow old too; and there is not so very much difference
between us. So then I shall seem your age; and, Miss Benette, when I
do grow up, will you be my friend?"

"Always, Master Auchester, if you still wish it. And in my heart I do
believe that friends are friends forever."

The sweet smile she gave me, the sweeter words she spoke, were
sufficient to assure me I should not be forgotten; and it was all I
wished, for then my heart was fixed upon my future.

"But you will not be going to-morrow, I suppose?"

"No, I wish I were."

"So do I."

"Thank you," said I, rather disconcerted; "I shall go very soon, I
suppose."

"It will not be long, I daresay," she answered, with another sweetest
smile; and I felt it to be her kind wish for me, and was consoled. And
when I left her she was standing quietly by her piano; nor did she
raise her eyes to follow me to the door.

By one of those curious chances that befall some people more than
others, I had a cold the next class-night. I was in an extremity of
passion to be kept at home,--that is to say, I rolled in my stifling
bed with the sulks pressing heavily on my heart, and the headache upon
my forehead. Millicent sat by me, and laughingly assured me I should
soon be quite well again; I solemnly averred I should never be well,
should never get up, should never see Davy any more, never go to
Germany. But I went to sleep after all; for Davy, with his usual
philanthropy, came all the way up to the house to inquire for me after
the class, and his voice aroused and soothed me together. I may say
that such a cold was a godsend just then, as it prevented my having to
do any lessons. The next day, being idle, I heard nothing of Davy;
neither the next. I thought it very odd; but on the third morning I
was permitted to go out, as it was very clear and bright. The smoke
looked beautiful, almost like another kind of flame, as it swelled
skywards, and I met Davy quite glowing with exercise.

"What a day for December!" said he, and cheerily held up a letter.

"Oh, Mr. Davy!" I cried; but he would not suffer me even to read the
superscription.

"First for your mother. Will you turn back and walk home with me?"

"I must not, sir; I am to walk to the turnpike and back."

"Away, then! and I am very glad to hear it."

To do myself justice, I did not even run. I could, indeed, for all my
impatient hope, scarcely help feeling there is no such blessing as
pure fresh air that fans a brow whose fever has lately faded. I came
at length to the toll-gate, and returned, braced for any adventure, to
the door of my own home. I flew into the parlor; my mother and Davy
were alone. My mother was wiping off a tear or two, and he seemed
smiling on purpose.

"Oh, mother!" I exclaimed, running up to her, "please don't cry."

"My dear Charles, you are a silly little boy. After all, what will you
do in Germany?"

She lifted me upon her lap. Davy walked up to the book-case.

"I find, Charles, that you must go immediately,--and, indeed, it will
be best if you travel with Mr. Santonio. And how could I send you
alone, with such an opportunity to be taken care of! Mr. Davy, will
you have the kindness to read that letter to my little boy?"

Davy, thus admonished, gathered up the letter now lying open upon the
table, and began to read it quite in his class voice, as if we two had
been an imposing audience.

      DEAR MADAM,--Although I have not had the pleasure of an
      introduction to you, I think the certificate of my cognizance
      by my friend Davy will be sufficient to induce you to allow
      me to take charge of your son at the end of this week, if he
      can then be ready, as I must leave England then, and return
      to Paris by the middle of February. Between this journey and
      that time I shall be in Germany to attend the examinations of
      the Cecilia School at Lorbeerstadt.[12] The Cecilia School
      now is exactly the place for your son, though he is six
      months too young to be admitted. At the same time, if he is
      to be admitted at all, he should at once be placed under
      direct training, and there are out-professors who undertake
      precisely this responsibility. My own experience proves that
      anything is better than beginning too late, or beginning too
      soon to work alone. I have made every inquiry which could be
      a proviso with you.

"Then here follows what would scarcely interest you," said Davy,
breaking off.

"Your friend is quite right, Charles. Now can you say you are sure I
may put faith in you?"

"What do you mean, mother? If you mean that I am to practise, _indeed_
I will; I never want to do anything else, and I won't have any money
to spend."

Davy came up to us and smiled: "I really think he is safe. You will
let him come to me one evening, dear madam?"

"Perhaps you can come to us. I really do not think we can spare him;
we have so much to do in the way of preparation."

It was an admirable providence that my whole time was, from morning to
night, taken up with my family. My sisters, assisted by Margareth,
made me a dozen shirts, and hemmed for me three dozen handkerchiefs. I
was being measured or fitted all day, and all the evening was running
up and down stairs with the completed items. Oh! if you had seen my
boxes you would have said that I ought to be very good to be so cared
for, and very beautiful besides; yet I was neither, and was sorely
longing to be away,--such kindness pained me more than it pleased. I
had a little jointed bed, which you would not have believed _was_ a
bed until it was set up. My mother admonished me if I found my bed
comfortable to keep that in my box; but she had some experience of
German beds, and English ones too, under certain circumstances. I had
a gridiron, and a coffee-pot, a spirit-lamp, and a case containing one
knife and fork, one plate, one spoon. I had everything I could
possibly want, and felt dreadfully bewildered. Clo was marking my
stockings one morning when Davy came in; he gave me one of his little
brown boxes, and in the box was a single cup and saucer of that
glowing, delicate china. When he pulled it out of his pocket I little
knew what it was, and when I found out, how I cried!

"I have, indeed, brought you a small remembrance, Charles; but I am a
small man, and you are a small boy, and I understand you are to have a
very small establishment."

He said this cheerily, but I could not laugh; he put his kind arm
round me, and I only wept the more. Clo was all the time quite
seriously, as I have said, tracing ineffaceably my initials in German
text, with crimson cotton,--none of your delible inks,--and Davy
pretended to be very much interested in them.

"What! all those stockings, Charles?"

"Yes, sir: you see we have provided for summer and winter," responded
Clo, as seriously as I have mentioned. "He will not want any till we
see him again, for he is to pay us a visit, if God spares him, next
Christmas."

Davy sighed, and kissed my forehead; I clung to him. "Shall I see you
again, Mr. Davy?"

"I have come to ask your mother whether I may take you to London; it
is precisely what I came for, and I have a little plan."

Davy had actually an engagement in London, or feigned to have one,--I
have never been able to discover whether it was a fact or a fiction;
and he proposed to my mother that I should sleep with him at his
aunt's house one night before I was deposited at the hotel where
Santonio rested, and to which he had advised I should be brought.

I was in fits of delight at the idea of Davy's company; yet, after
all, I did not have much of that, for he travelled to London on the
top of the coach, and I was an inside passenger at my mother's
request.

Then comes a sleep of memory, not unaccompanied by dreams,--a dream
of being hurled into a corner by a lady, and of jamming myself so that
I could not stir hand or foot between her and the window; a dream of
desperate efforts to extricate myself; a dream of sudden respite, cold
air, and high stars beyond and above the houses, a cracked horn, a
flashing lantern; a dream of dark in a hackney-coach, and of stopping
in a stilly street before a many-windowed mansion, as it seemed to me.
Then I am aware to this hour of a dense headache, and bones almost
knotted together, till there arrives the worst nightmare reality can
breed,--the smell of toast, muffins, and tea; the feeling of a knife
and fork you cannot manage for sleepfulness; and the utter depression
of your quicksilver.

I could not even look at Miss Lenhart; but I heard that her voice was
going on all the time, and felt that she looked at me now and then. I
was conveyed into bed by Davy without any exercise on my own part, and
I slumbered in that sleep which absorbs all time, till very bright
day. Then I awoke and found myself alone, though Davy had left a neat
impression in the great soft bed. Presently I heard his steps, and his
fingers on the lock. He brought my breakfast in his own hand, and
while I forced myself to partake of it, he told me he should carry me
to Santonio at two o'clock, the steamboat leaving London Bridge at six
the same evening. And at two o'clock we arrived at the hotel. In a
lofty apartment sat Santonio near a table laid for dinner.

I beheld my boxes in one corner, and my violin-case strapped to the
largest; but all Santonio's luggage consisted of that case of his
which had been wrapped up warm in baize, and one portmanteau. He arose
and welcomed us with a smile most amiable; and having shaken hands
with Davy, took hold of both mine and held them, while still rallying
in a few words about our punctuality. Then he rang for dinner, and I
made stupendous efforts not to be a baby, which I should not have been
sorry to find myself at that instant. The two masters talked together
without noticing me, and presently I recovered; but only to be put
upon the sofa, which was soft as a powder-puff, and told to go to
sleep. I made magnificent determinations to keep awake, but in vain;
and it was just as well I could not, though I did not think so when I
awoke. For just then starting and sitting up, I beheld a lamp upon the
table, and heard Santonio's voice in the entry, haranguing a waiter
about a coach. But looking round and round into every corner I saw no
Davy, and I cannot describe how I felt when I found he had kissed me
asleep, and gone away altogether. As Santonio re-entered, the sweet
cordiality with which he tempered his address to me was more painful
than the roughest demeanor would have been just then, thrilling as I
was with the sympathy I had never drawn except from Davy's heart, and
which I had never lost since I had known him. It was as if my soul
were suddenly unclad, and left to writhe naked in a sunless
atmosphere; still I am glad to say I was grateful to Santonio. It was
about five o'clock when we entered a hackney-coach, and were conveyed
to the city from the wide West End. The great river lay as a leaden
dream while we ran across the bridge; but how dreamily, drowsily, I
can never describe, was conveyed to me that arched darkness spanning
the lesser gloom as we turned down dank sweeping steps, and alighted
amidst the heavy splash of that rolling tide. There was a confusion
and hurry here that mazed my faculties; and most dreadfully alarmed I
became at the thought of passing into that vessel set so deep into the
water, and looking so large and helpless. I was on board, however,
before I could calculate the possibilities of running away, and so
getting home again. Santonio put his arm around me as I crossed to the
deck, and I could not but feel how careful the great violin was of the
little human instrument committed to his care. Fairly on deck, the
whirling and booming, the crowd not too great, but so busy and
anxious, the head-hung lamp, and the cheery peeps into cabins lighter
still through glittering wires, all gave motion to my spirit. I was
soon more excited than ever, and glorified myself so much that I very
nearly fell over the side of the vessel into the Thames, while I was
watching the wheel that every now and then gave a sleepy start from
the oily, dark water. Santonio was looking after our effects for a
while, but it was he who rescued me in this instance, by pulling my
great-coat (exactly like Fred's) that had been made expressly, for me
in the festival-town, and which, feeling very new, made me think about
it a great deal more than it was worth. Then laughing heartily, but
still not speaking, he led me downstairs. How magnificent I found all
there! I was quite overpowered, never having been in any kind of
vessel; but what most charmed me was a glimpse of a second wonderful
region within the long dining-room,--the feminine retreat, whose door
was a little bit ajar.

The smothered noise of gathering steam came from above, and most
strange was it to hear the many footed tramp overhead, as we sat upon
the sofa, and spread beneath the oval windows all around. And
presently I realized the long tables, and all that there was upon
them, and was especially delighted to perceive some flowers mounted
upon the epergnes.

I was cravingly hungry by this time, for the first time since I had
left my home, and everything here reminded me of eating. Santonio, I
suppose, anticipated this fact, for he asked me immediately what I
should like. I said I should like some tea and a slice of cold meat.
He seemed amused at my choice, and while he drank a glass of some wine
or other and ate a crust, I had all to myself a little round tray,
with a short, stout tea-pot and enormous breakfast cup set before me;
with butter as white as milk, and cream as thick as butter, the butter
being developed in a tiny pat, with the semblance of the steamship we
were then in stamped upon the top; also a plate covered with meat all
over, upon beginning to clear which, I discovered another cartoon in
blue of the same subject. After getting to the bottom of the cup, and
a quarter uncovering the plate, I could do no more in that line, and
Santonio asked me what I should like to do about sleeping. I was
startled, for I had not thought about the coming night at all. He led
me on the instant to a certain other door, and bade me peep in; I
could only think of a picture I had seen of some catacombs,--in fact,
I think a catacomb preferable in every respect to a sleeping cabin.
The odors that rushed out, of brandy and lamp-oil, were but visionary
terrors compared with the aspect of those supernaturally constructed
enclosed berths, in not a few of which the victims of that entombment
had already deposited themselves.

"I can't sleep in there!" I said shudderingly as I withdrew, and
withdrawing, was inexpressibly revived by the air blowing down the
staircase. "Oh, let us sit up all night! on the sea too!"

Santonio replied, with great cordiality, that he should prefer such an
arrangement to any other, and would see what could be contrived for
me.

And so he did; and I can never surpass my own sensations of mere
satisfaction as I lay upon a seat on deck by ten o'clock, with a
boat-cloak for my pillow and a tarpaulin over my feet, Santonio by my
side, with a cloak all over him like a skin, his feet on his
fiddle-case, and an exquisitely fragrant regalia in his mouth.

My feelings soon became those of careering ecstasy,--careering among
stars all clear in the darkness over us; of passionate delight, rocked
to a dream by the undulation I began to perceive in our seaward
motion. I fell asleep about midnight, and woke again at dawn; but I
experienced just enough then of existing circumstances in our position
to retreat again beneath the handkerchief I had spread upon my face,
and again I slept and dreamed.

FOOTNOTE:

[12] The Cecilia School at Lorbeerstadt is probably intended to
represent the Conservatory at Leipsic, which Mendelssohn founded in
1843.




CHAPTER XXV.


At noon, when at length I roused myself, we were no longer upon the
sea. We swept on tranquilly between banks more picturesque, more
glorious, more laden with spells for me, than any haven I had
fortified with Spanish castles. Castles there were too, or what I took
for castles,--silvery gray amidst leafless trees, and sometimes
softest pine woods with their clinging mist. Then came shining
country, where the sky met the sun-bright slopes, and then a quiet
sail at rest in the tiny harbor. But an hour or two brought me to the
idea of cities, though even they were as cities in a dream. And yet
this was not the Rhine; but I made sure it was so, having forgotten
Clo's geography lessons, and that there could be any other river in
Germany,--so that when Santonio told me its real name I was very angry
at it. After I had wearied myself with gazing, he drew me back to my
seat, and began to speak more consecutively than he had done yet.

"Now, sir," said he, "do you see that castle?" pointing to something
in the prospect which may or may not have been a castle, but which I
immediately realized as one. "You are to be shut up there. Really and
seriously, you have more faith than any one I ever had the honor of
introducing yet, under any circumstances whatever. Pray don't you feel
any curiosity about your destination?"

"Yes, sir, plenty; but I forgot what I was going for."

"And where you were going to?"

"Sir, I did not know where. I thought you would tell me when you
liked."

"I don't know myself, but I daresay we shall fall in with your
favorite 'Chevalier.'"

"My favorite who, sir?"

"The gentleman who enslaved you at the performance of the 'Messiah,'
in your part of the world."

"Oh, sir! what can I ever say to you? I cannot bear it."

"Cannot bear what? Nay, you must not expect too much of him now you
know who he is. He is merely a very clever composer."

"Oh, sir! how did you ever find out?"

"By writing to Milans-André,--another idol for you, by the way."

"Oh! I know all about Milans-André."

"Indeed! and pray what is all about him?"

"I know he plays wonderfully, and fills a large theatre with one
pianoforte. Stop! He has a handsome face and long arms,--rather too
long for his body. He is very--let me see--something, but not
something else; very famous, but not beloved."

"Who told you that? A most coherent description, as it happens."

"Miss Lawrence."

"Miss Lawrence is a blab. So you have no curiosity to learn your
fate?"

"I know _that_; but I should like to know where I am going."

"To an old gentleman in a hollow cave."

"I wish I were, and then perhaps he would teach me to make gold."

"That is like a Jew, fie! But the fiddle has made gold."

"Why like a Jew? Because they are rich,--Jews, I mean?"

"Richer generally than most folks, but not all either."

"Oh, sir! I did not mean money." But as I looked at him, I felt he
would not, could not, understand what I meant, so I returned to the
former charge.

"Does he live in a cellar, sir, or in a very old house?"

"In an old house, certainly. But you won't like him, Auchester,--at
least not at first; only he will work you rightly, and take care of
your morals and health."

"How, sir?"

"By locking you up when you are at home, and sending you to walk out
every day."

"Don't they all send the boys out to walk in Germany then?"

"I suppose so. But how shall you like being locked up?"

"In the dark, sir, do you mean?"

"No, boy; to practise in a little cave of your own."

"What _does_ make you call it a cave?"

"Because great treasures are hidden there for such as like the bore of
grubbing them up. You have no idea, by the way, how much dirty work
there is to do anything at all in music."

"I suppose you mean, to _get_ at anything. But it cannot be worse than
what people go through to get to heaven."

"If that is your notion, you are all right. I have taken some trouble
to get you into this place, for the old gentleman is a whimsical one,
and takes very few pupils now."

"Did you know him, sir, before you heard of him for me?"

"He taught me all I know, except what I taught myself, and that was
preciously little. But that was before he came to Lorbeerstadt. I knew
nothing about this place. Your favorite learned of him when he was
your age, and long afterwards."

"Who, sir,--the same?"

"The conductor."

"Oh, sir!" It was a dreadful thing to feel I had, as it were, got hold
of him and lost him again; but Santonio's manner was such that I did
not think he could mean the same person.

"Are you sure it is the same, Mr. Santonio?" I reiterated again, and
yet again, while my companion, whose laugh had passed into a yawn, was
gazing at the smoke.

"Sure? Of course I am sure. I know every conductor in Europe."

"I daresay you do, sir; but this is not a common conductor."

"No conductors are common, my friend. He is very clever, a genius too,
and will do a great deal; but he is too young at present to be talked
of without caution."

"Why, sir?"

"Because we may spoil him."

I was indignant, I was sick, but so impotent I could only say, "Sir,
has he ever heard _you_ play?"

"I cannot tell really all the people who hear me play. I don't know
who they are in public."

"Have you ever heard _him_ play?"

"No."

"Oh, sir! then how _can_ you know? What makes you call him Chevalier?
Is that his real name?"

"I tell you precisely what I was told, my boy; Milans-André calls him
'My young friend the Chevalier,'--nothing else. Most likely they gave
him the order."

Santonio was now talking Dutch to me, and yet I could not bring myself
to detain him by further questioning, for he had strolled to the
staircase. Soon afterwards the dinner-bell rang. The afternoon being a
little spent, we came up again and rested. It was twilight now, and my
heart throbbed as it ever does in that intermediate dream. Soon
Santonio retired to smoke, and I then lay all along a seat, and looked
to heaven until I fell into a doze; and all I felt was real, and I
knew less of what was passing around me than of that which stirred
within. Long it may have been, but it seemed very soon and suddenly
that I was rudely brought to myself by a sound and skurry, and a
suspension of our progress. It was dark and bleak besides, and as
foggy as I had ever seen it in England,--the lamp at our head was like
a moon; and all about me there were shapes, not sights, of houses, and
echoes, not sounds, of voices from the shore.

The shore, indeed! And my first impression of Germany was one of
simple astonishment to find it, on the whole, so much like, or so
little unlike, England. I told Santonio so much, as he stood next me,
and curbed me with his arm from going forwards. He answered that he
supposed I thought they all lived in fiddle-cases and slept upon
pianofortes. I was longing to land indefinably. I knew not where I
was, how near or how far from my appointed place of rest. I will not
say my heart was sad, it was only sore, to find Santonio, though so
handsome, not quite so beautiful a spirit as my first friend, Lenhart
Davy. We watched almost half the passengers out of the boat; the rest
were to continue their fresh-water route to a large city far away, and
we were the last to land of all who landed there.

In less than an hour, thanks to Santonio's quickening of the pulses of
existence at our first landing-place, we were safe in a hackney-coach
(very unlike any other conveyance), if indeed it could be called
"safe" to be so bestowed, as I was continually precipitated against
Santonio. His violin-case had never left his hand since we quitted the
vessel,--and this was just as well, for it might have suffered from
the jolting. Its master was all kindness now. "Cheer up," said he; "do
not let your idea of German life begin here. You will soon find plenty
to amuse you." He rubbed the reeking fog from one glass with his
handkerchief forthwith, and I, peeping out, saw something of houses
drawing near. They were dim and tall and dark, as if they had never
fronted daylight. It took us quite half an hour to reach the village,
notwithstanding, for our pace was laboriously tardy; and again and
again I wished I had stayed with Santonio at the little inn where we
took the coach, and to which he was himself to return to sleep, having
bespoken a bed there; for I felt that day would have done everything
for me in manning and spiriting me, and that there was too much
mystery in my transition state already to bear the surcharging mystery
of night with thought undaunted. Coming into that first street, I
believed we should stop every instant, for the faint few lamps, strung
here and there, gave me a notion of gabled windows and gray-black
arches, nothing more definite than any dream; so much the better.
Still we stopped not anywhere in that region, nor even when, having
passed the market-place with its little colonnade, we turned, or were
shaken, into a quiet square. It came upon me like a nook of panorama;
but I heard the splash of falling water before I beheld, starting from
the mist, its shape, as it poured into a basin of shadowy stone
beneath a skeleton tree, whose lowest sprays I could have touched as
we drove near the fountain, so close we came. And then I saw before me
a church, and could discern the stately steps and portico, even the
crosses on the graves, which bade me remember that they died also in
Germany. No organ echoes pealed, or choral song resounded, no chime
struck; but my heart beat all these tunes, and for the first time I
associated the feeling of religion with any earth-built shrine.

It was in a street beyond the square, and overlooked by the tower of
the church itself, that at length we stopped indeed, and that I found
myself bewildered at once by darkness and expectation, standing upon
the pavement before a foreign doorway, enough for any picture of the
brain.

"Now," said my escort, "I will take you upstairs first,--for you would
never find your way,--and then return and see after all these things.
The man won't run away with them, I believe,--he is too ugly to be
anything but honest. I hope you do not expect a footman to open the
door?"

"I dislike footmen, but there is no knocker. Please show me the bell,
Mr. Santonio."

"Please remember that this is a mountain which contains many caves
besides that to which we are about to commit you. And if you interfere
with anybody else's cave, the inhabitant will spring up yours with
gunpowder."

"I know that a great many people live in one house,--my mother said
so; but she never told me how you got into the houses."

"I will tell you now. You see the bells here, like organ-stops: this
is yours. Number I cannot read, but I know it from the description I
took care to procure. I will ring now, and they will let us in."

I found, after waiting in profound expectation, that the door had set
itself open, just as the gate of the London Temple Garden is wont to
do; but instead of finding access to sunshine and beds of flowers, we
were plunged, on our entrance, into darkness which might be felt.

Santonio, evidently accustomed to all conventionalities of all
countries, expressed no astonishment, and did not even grumble, as I
should have expected a person of his temperament to do. I was so
astonished that I could not speak. How soon I learned to love that
very darkness, and to leap up and down those very stairs even in the
darkness! though I now held Santonio's hand so tightly that I could
feel the lissom muscles double up and bend in. He drew me after him
gently and carefully to the first floor, and again to the second
without speaking, and then we stood still to take breath.

"That was a pull!" he observed. "Suppose the old gentleman has gone to
bed?"

"Oh, sir! then I will go back with you until to-morrow."

"No, indeed." He laid hold upon my arm. "Listen! hush!"

I stood listening from head to foot. I heard the beloved but
unfamiliar voice; creeping down another story, it came--_my_ violin,
or _the_ violin, somewhere up in the clouds. I longed to rush forward
now, and positively ran up the stairs yet remaining. There upon my one
hand was the door through whose keyhole, whose every crack, that sound
had streamed, and I knew it as I passed, and waited for Santonio upon
the haunted precinct.

"Now," said he, arriving very leisurely at the top, "we shall go in to
see the old gentleman."

"Will he have a beard, sir, as he is a Jew?"

"Who told you he has a Jew-beard? Nevertheless he has a beard; but
pray hold your tongue about the Jews,--at least till you know him a
little better."

"I do not mean," thought I diffidently, "to talk to the old gentleman.
If he is a Jew I shall know it, and it will be enough;" but I did not
say so to Santonio, who did not appear to prize his lineage as I did
the half of mine. My heart began to beat faster than from the steep
ascent, when he, without preparing me further, rapped very vigorously
upon another unseen door. I heard no voice reply, but I concluded he
did, as he deliberately turned the lock, and drew me immediately after
him as I had shrunk behind him. I need not have been afraid,--the room
was empty. It was a room full of dusky light; that is, all tones which
blended into it were dim, and its quaint nicety put every new-world
notion out of the way for the time. The candles upon the table were
brightly trimmed, but not wax,--only slender wax ones beamed in
twisted sconces from the desk of an organ that took up the whole side
of the room, opposing us as we entered, and whose pipes were to my
imagining childhood lost in the clouds, indeed, for the roof of the
room had been broken to admit them. The double key-board, open,
glittered black and white, and I was only too glad to be able to
examine it as closely as I wished. The room had no carpet, but I did
not miss it or want it, for the floor was satin bright with polish,
and its general effect was ebony, while that of the furniture was oak.
There was a curious large closet in a corner, like another little room
put away into this one; but what surprised me most was that the
chamber was left to itself.

"Where is he?" said Santonio, appealing to the silence; but then he
seemed to be reminded, and shouted very loud in German some name I
could not realize, but which I write, having since realized.
"Aronach![13] where art thou?"

In German, and very loud, a voice replied, as coming down the
organ-pipes: "I am aloft chastising an evil spirit; nor will I descend
until I have packed the devil downstairs." At this instant, more at
hand than the sound I had met upon the staircase, there was a wail as
of a violin in pain; but I could not tell whether it was a fiddle or a
child, until the wail, in continuing, shifted from semitone to
semitone.

Santonio sat down in one of the chairs and laughed; then arose, having
recovered himself, and observed, "If this is his behavior, I may as
well go and see after your boxes. Keep yourself here till I come back;
but if he come down, salute him in German, and it will be all right."

He retired and I remained; and now I resolved to have another good
look. One side of the room I had not yet examined. Next the door I
found a trio or quartet of three-legged stools, fixed one into the
other, and nearest them a harpsichord,--a very harpsichord with
crooked legs. It was covered with baize, and a pile of music-books
reposed upon the baize, besides some antique instrument-cases. Other
and larger cases were on the floor beneath the harpsichord; there
hung a talisman or two of glittering brass upon the wall, by floating
ribbons of red.

Then I fastened myself upon the pictures, and those strange wreaths of
withered leaves that waved between them, and whose searest hues
befitted well their vicinage. As I stood beneath those pictures, those
dead-brown garlands rustled as if my light breath had been the autumn
wind. I was stricken at once with melancholy and romance, but I
understood not clearly the precise charm of those relics, or my
melancholy would have lost itself in romance alone.

There was one portrait of Bach. I knew it again, though it was a
worthier hint of him than Davy's; and underneath that portrait was
something of the same kind, which vividly fascinated me by its
subject. It was a very young head, almost that of an infant, lying,
rather than bending, over an oblong book, such in shape as those
represented in pictures of literary cherubs. The face was more than
half forehead, which the clustering locks could not conceal, though
they strove to shadow; and in revenge, the hair swept back and tumbled
sideways, curling into the very swell of the tender shoulder. The
countenance was of sun-bright witchery, lustrous as an elf of summer
laughing out of a full-blown rose. Tiny hands were doubled round the
book, and the lips wore themselves a smile that seemed to stir and
dimple, and to flutter those floating ringlets. It was strange I was,
though so unutterably drawn to it, in nothing reminded of any child or
man I had ever seen, but merely thought it an ideal of the infant
music, if music could personate infancy. After a long, long gaze I
looked away, expressly to have the delight of returning to it; and
then I saw the stove and approved of it, instead of missing, as I was
told at home I should miss, the hearthrug and roseate fire-shine.
Indeed, the stove was much more in keeping here, according to my
outlandish taste.

Before I returned to the picture Santonio re-entered, and finding me
still alone, took up a broom which he discovered in some region, and,
mounted on a chair, made with it no very gentle demonstrations upon
the ceiling, which was low, and which he could thus easily reach. In
about ten minutes more, I could feel, no less than hear, a footstep I
did not know, for I am generally cognizant of footsteps. This was
cautious and slow, yet not heavy; and I was aware it could be none
other than that of my master presumptive. If I could have turned
myself into a mustard-pot, to delay my introduction, I would have done
so without the slightest hesitation; but no! I remained myself, and
he, all himself, opened the door and came in. I had expected a tall
man,--broad; here was a little gentleman no bigger than Davy, with a
firm and defiant tread, clad in a garment that wrapped about his feet,
in color brown, that passed well into the atmosphere of his cave. He
confronted Santonio as if that wonder were a little girl in
petticoats, with no more reverence and not less benevolence, for he
laid one arm upon his shoulder and embraced him, as in England only
very young and tender brothers embrace, or a son embraces his father.
There was complaisance together with condescension in his aspect; but
when he turned upon me, both complaisance and condescension were
overpast, and a lour of indifference clouded my very faculties as with
a film of worldly fear. Then he chucked me under the chin, and held me
by it a moment without my being aware whether he examined me or not,
so conveniently disposed were his black eye-lashes; and then he let
me go again, and turned his back upon me.

"Sit!" said he to Santonio; and then he threw his hand behind him, and
pointing, without turning his head, indicated the group of stools. I
nervously disentangled one and sat down upon it then and there by the
side of the very harpsichord. Santonio being also seated, and wearing,
though as cool as usual, a less dominant aspect, the brisk demon
marched to the bureau, which I had taken little heed of, under the
window, but which, upon his opening, I discovered to be full of all
sorts of drawers and pigeon-holes, where a family of young mice would
have enjoyed a game at hide-and-seek. He stood there writing, without
any apology, for some time, and only left off when a female servant,
brilliant and stolid as a Dutch doll, threw the door open again to
bring in supper.

She carried both tureens and dishes, and went into the closet after
bottles of wine and a tablecloth; and everything she did was very
orderly, and done very quietly. She spoke to Aronach, having arranged
the table; and he arose, wiped his pen, and closed the bureau. Then he
came to Santonio, and addressed him in most beautiful clear German,
such German as was my mother's mother-tongue.

"I travelled very comfortably, thank you," said Santonio, in reply to
some inquiry suggestive of the journey, "and I am glad to see you
younger than ever."

"Oh! my sort don't die; we are tough as hempen cloth. It is _that_
make which frets itself threadbare,"--he pointed obviously at me.
"What is to be done with him, eh?"

"To be left here, of course, as we agreed."

"Recollect my conditions. I turn him out if he become ill."

"Oh! he is very well indeed; they are all pale in England, they have
no sun."

"_Be_ well then!" said Aronach, threateningly, yet not terrifyingly,
"and _keep_ well!"

What a silvery stream swept over his shirt-bosom! it was soft as
whitest moonlight. "Is that a beard?" thought I--"how beautiful must
the high-priest have looked!" This thought still touched me, when in
came a boy in a blouse, and I heard no more of his practice as I now
recognized it, though the wail still came from above, fitful and
woebegone. This boy was tall and slender, and his face, though he had
an elegant head, was too formed and adult to be agreeable or very
taking for me. His only expression was that of haughty self-content;
but there was no real pride in his bearing, and no reserve. His hands
were large, but very well articulated and extremely white; there was
no spirit in them, and no spirituality in his aspect. He took no
notice of me, except to curl his upper lip--which was not short, and
which a curl did not become--as he lifted a second stool and carried
it up to the table; nor did he wait to be asked to sit down upon it,
and having done so, to smooth his hair off his forehead and lean his
elbows upon the table. Then Aronach took a chair, and admonished
Santonio to do the same. The latter made himself instantly at home,
but most charmingly so, and began to help himself from a dish
directly. The young gentleman upon the stool was just about to lift
the cover from the tureen in the same style, when Aronach roused, and
looking grandly upon him said, or rather muttered, "Where are thy
manners? Is it thy place in my house to ape my guests? See to thy
companion there, who is wearier than thou, and yet he waits. Go and
bring him up, or thou shalt give thy supper to the cat's daughter."

"So I will," responded the blouse, with assurance; and leaving his
stool abruptly, he ran into the closet aforementioned, and brought
back a kitten, which as he held it by the nape of its neck came
peaceably enough, but upon his dropping it roughly to the floor, set
up a squeak. Now the wrath of Aronach appeared too profound for
utterance. Raising his deep-set but lightsome eyes from a perfect
thicket of lashes, he gave the impertinent one look which reminded me
of Van Amburgh in the lion's den. Then, ladling three or four
spoonfuls of soup or broth into a plate, he set the plate upon the
floor and the kitten at it, so seriously, that I dared not laugh. The
kitten, meantime, unused to strong meats, for it was not a week-old
mite, mewed and whined in antiphon to the savage lamentations of
another cat in the closet, its maternal parent. The blouse never
stirred an inch, save carelessly to sneer over his shoulder at me; and
I never loved him from that moment. But Santonio nodded to me
significantly, as to say, "Come here!" and I came and planted my stool
at his side.

Aronach took no notice, but went on pouring coffee, one cup of which
he set by the kitten. Again she piteously smelled, but finding it even
worse than the broth, she crept up to the closet-door and smelled at
that.

"Go up!" said Aronach, to the blouse, "and send Burney to his supper.
He shall have the cat's supper, as thou hast given thine to the cat."

He went out sulkily, and the wail above ceased. I also heard
footsteps, but he came back again alone.

"He won't come down."

"Won't! Did he say 'won't,' Iskar? Have a care!"

"He says he wants no supper."

"That I have taken away his stomach, eh? Come hither, thou black and
white bird that art not yet a pyet."

This was to me; I was just sliding from my stool.

"Eat and drink first, and then thou shalt carry it to him. Thou
lookest better brought up. Don't grimace, Iskar, or thou shalt sleep
in the cupboard with the cat, and the rats shall dance in thy fine
curls. So now eat, Aukester, if that be thy name."

"Sir, I am Carl; will you please to call me Carl?"

He gave me a glance from behind the coffee-stand. Sparks as from steel
seemed to come out of his orbs and fly about my brain; but I was not
frightened the least, for the lips of this austerest of autocrats were
smiling like sunlight beneath the silver hair. I saw at this moment
that Aronach had a bowl of smoking milk crammed with bread by his
side, and believing it to be for the violin up in the clouds, and
concluding inferentially that the unseen was some one very small, I
entreated Aronach without fear to let me carry it to him while yet it
smoked.

He did not object, but rather stared, and observed to Santonio, "His
father makes a baby of him; to give a boy such stuff is enough to make
a girl grow up instead." Still he handed it to me with the caution,
"If thou fallest on thy nose in going up to heaven, the kitten will
lose her supper, for the milk is all used up in the town." I could
just see a very narrow set of steps, exactly like a belfry-stair, when
I opened the door, and having shut it again and found myself in
darkness, I concluded to leave the bowl on the ground till I had
explored to the top. I did so, and spun upwards, discovering another
door, to which, though also in darkness, the wail of the violin became
my light. I just unlatched it, and returned for my burden, carefully
adjusting spoon and basin on the road back. I knocked first, not to
alarm the semi-tonic inhabitant; and then, receiving no intimation,
entered of my own accord. It was a queer region, hardly so superior as
a garret, extremely low and vast, with mountains of lumber in every
corner, and in the midst a pile of boxes with a portmanteau or two,
and many items of property which for me were nondescript. It had no
furniture of its own besides, but to do it justice it was
weather-proof. I could see all this rugged imagery on the instant, but
not so easily I discerned a little figure in the very centre of the
boxes, sitting upon the least of the boxes, and solitarily regaling
the silence, without either desk or book, with what had made me suffer
below stairs. The organ-pipes came up here, and reached to the very
roof; they gave me a strange feeling as of something misplaced and
mangled, but otherwise I was charmed to discover them. I hastened
across the floor. The player was certainly not an adept,--a tiny,
lonely looking boy, who as I went up to him almost let his fiddle fall
with fright, and shrank from me as some little children do from dogs.
I was as tall again as he, and felt quite manly. "I am only come," I
said, "to bring your supper,--have it while it is hot; it is so good
then!"

Do not believe, sweet reader, that my German was more polished than my
English,--it was quite the same. He dropped his bow upon the nearest
box, and depressing his violin so that it touched the ground while he
still held it, looked up at me with such a wistful wonder, his lip
still quivering, his pretty hair all ruffled up.

"I don't want it, thank you."

"You must eat it; you have been up here ever so long."

"Yes, a good while; please take it away. Are you the new one who was
coming?"

"Who said I was coming?"

"The master. He said you would beat us both, and get first to
Cecilia."

"That is because I am older. I can't play the least in the world. I
don't know even how to hold the bow. Come, _do_ eat this good-looking
stuff."

"I don't think I can, I feel so sick."

"That is because you _do_ want something to eat."

"It is not that"--he touched my jacket. "This is what they wear in
England. I do wish you would talk English to me."

I was touched almost into tears. "You are such a little darling!" I
exclaimed; and I would have given anything to fondle him, but I was
afraid of staying, so I took a spoonful of the milk and put it to his
lips, still another and another, till he had taken it all; and then I
said, "Do not practise any more;" for he was disconsolately gathering
up his bow.

"I must until bed-time; but I am so sleepy."

"Why are you left up here? I will stay with you."

"No, no, you must not. I only came up here because the master caught
me looking out of the window this morning, and the windows here don't
show you anything but the sky."

As I went out at the door I looked after him again. He was just
finishing one of those long yawns that babies delight in. The moment I
found my way below, I marched to the master's chair. He was awful in
his dignity then, with the wine-bottle beside him and a glass held
half-way to his lips.

"Sir, he has eaten it all, but he is so very sleepy; mayn't he go to
bed?"

Santonio was so overcome with laughter at my audacity, though I was
really very much alarmed, that he leaned back in his chair and shook
again. Aronach bent upon me his flowing beard: "Dost thou know to
refrain thyself, as well as thou knowest to rebuke thine elders?" But
I could plainly see he was not angry, for he arose and tapped upon the
ceiling with a stout oak staff that he fished from the unimagined
closet. Then the little one came down and into the room, shy of
Santonio, and keeping behind his chair, as he murmured "Good-night" to
Aronach. The latter gave him a nod which would not have disgraced Jove
in full council. Santonio requested very kindly that I too might go to
bed; and in a few minutes I found myself in that little cave of my own
of which he had made mention.

Its entrance was hard by, through one of the very doors I had noticed
when the glimmer showed me the staircase, and it entirely answered my
expectations, in so far as it was very dim and haunted-looking, very
unlike my own room in England, or any of our rooms at home. It had a
stove, a looking-glass, and a press large enough to contain a bride's
trousseau complete. There was also a recess which seemed lined with
London fog, but which, on examination by the light of my candle, I
found to contain the bed in a box of which my mother had forewarned
me. I could no more have slept in it than if it had been a coffin, and
for the first time I fully appreciated her provision for my comfort in
this particular. My boxes were all there, and I uncorded them and drew
forth my keys. My excellent sister Clo had packed in one trunk the bed
and bedding, and one set of night-clothes, also a variety of
toilet necessaries in holland bags. It was quite an affair to lift out
the pieces; they were fitted into each other so beautifully that it
was natural to imagine they could never be got back again. None but an
experienced feminine hand could have accomplished such a feat, and
very carefully had I been inducted into the puzzlement of putting the
parts together. I had just unfolded the tight white mattress, so
narrow, but so exactly wide enough, when Santonio knocked at the door
to bid me good-night and farewell; and as he came in he assisted me in
the accomplishment of my plans with that assiduous deftness which
pre-eminently distinguishes the instrumental artist. He most kindly
offered to see me into bed; but that was out of the question, so I let
him go with my hearty thanks. It was not the least a melancholy
feeling with which I stretched myself, all tingling with my rapid
ablutions, beneath my home-blanket. I did not the least long after
home, nor the least experience the mother-sickness that is the very
treble-string of humility to many a hero in his inaugurative exile;
but I felt extremely old, grand, and self-reliant, especially
satisfied, in spite of my present ignorance, that by some means or
other this Aronach would make a man of me, and not a trifler. I was
just asleep when I heard a hand on the lock, and that no dream, for a
voice vociferated, roughly enough,--"Out with the light!" I sprang up
and opened the door.

"It is only my little lamp, sir, that I brought with me, and it is
very safe, as you see; but still, if you wish it, I will try to sleep
in the dark. I have never liked to do so, because it excites me."

"Bah! thou art too young to know the meaning of excitement. But for
the sake of some one else who loves the night-lamp, thou mayest keep
thine eyes open with it, and thank him too, for it is his doing. Now
get back to bed! and don't come out again,--the quick and living walk
not about in night-smocks here."

I heard him bolt me in as soon as I shut the door. I cannot say this
proceeding pleased me, but on the contrary cost me many a cold sweat
until I became accustomed to it. I lay a little while awake, now
spying out such variations from English style as had escaped me on my
first acquaintance with my quarters; then reverted to Aronach's dark
hint about the person who, like me, was excited by the darkness; and
at last recollected my contemporaries, and speculated upon their
present circumstantials. Most softly did that poor little soul present
himself to mine as he played with my buttons, and I secretly
determined to become his protector and ally. As for the imp in the
blouse, I abjured him at first sight; perhaps because he was, though
repugnant to my taste, handsome and elegant, and I was neither.

FOOTNOTE:

[13] It is generally accepted that Aronach is a portrait of Zelter,
the friend of Goethe and teacher of Mendelssohn, who was for many
years director of the Sing Akademie at Berlin. He was the first who
inspired Mendelssohn with his love for John Sebastian Bach's music.




CHAPTER XXVI.


I awoke with sonorous cries, and sounds of bells, and songs of
sellers, and the dim ringing of wheels on a frosty soil. Hard and
white the day-dews stood upon the windows; the sky was clear as light
itself, and my soul sprang as into the arms of freedom. It occurred to
me that I was perhaps late, and I dressed fast. About half-way to the
end, I heard the violins begin, both of them; but now they
outrageously contradicted each other in different directions, and I
could keep by my ear to neither.

I made the utmost haste, but, as in most cases, it was least speed. I
pulled off a button, and then a shoestring came loose; I had to begin
very nearly all over again. And when at length equipped, I recalled
the incarceration of the previous night, and wondered how long I
should stay there; but a sudden impulse sent me to the door, and
immediately it yielded to my hand. "He has been here, then," I
thought, "and has not awakened me, because I was tired last night. How
good, to be sure! Not at all what I expected." I sallied forth to the
landing; it was like a room itself, but still dark,--dark for
day-time; and I could only make out its extent by the glimmer through
the crack beneath every door. I listened at each first, not knowing at
the instant which was which; but the violins asserted themselves, and
I chose one to unlock on my own responsibility. I had made a mistake
here, and come into the untenanted organ-room where we had supped.
There the wintry light reigned full, and freshened up the old tints
till they gleamed no more dusky, but rich.

The pictures and wreaths of other years gave welcome to me, that magic
child especially; nor less the harpsichord unopened, quiet, while
those sounds of younger violins broke through and through my fancy,
and made my heart swell up till I could have fainted with emotion.

But of all that pressed upon me, the crowning sense was of that silent
organ lost in the shady roof; the sun playing upon those columned
tubes, and the black-white key-board clustering to hide its wealth of
"unheard melodies," sweeter than those "_heard_" as one has sung, who
can surely never have _heard_ them!

The chamber had been brushed and swept, but still the fine dust flew,
and caught the sunshine on its eddies like another shade of light.
There was no one in the room, and, my first flush over, I felt alone
and idle. The table was spread for breakfast, as I discovered, last of
all; and I question whether such coffee as stood upon the stove so
cosily could be surpassed even in Arabia. It was so perfect that it
stood the test of sugarlessness, which I preferred, if possible.
Standing to eat and drink in all haste, a speculation stung me,--where
was my violin? It had not even slept with me; I had missed it in my
room,--that baby of mine, that doll, that ladykin! I looked
everywhere,--at least everywhere I could; the closet-door I did not
try, justly supposing that it was not my place to do so; and at last I
concluded to attack my fellow-pupils.

I found my small friend's door very easily, and turned the key to
admit myself. The room, to my amazement, was precisely like my own,
even to that bed in the recess; and the inmate was not alarmed, for
he evidently expected me.

"Oh!" he said, after putting up his lips to mine, "Marc has your study
for this morning; the master gave it him to keep till you were ready.
But mind you lock me in again when you get out, or he will flog you
and me."

"Did he ever flog you yet?"

"No, and he does not call it 'flog;' but he did tie Marc's hands
together one day, and he said it was the same to him to do that as for
an English master to flog."

"A very mild type, I think. But who is Marc?"

"Marc Iskar; you saw him last night. He won't speak to me; he says I
am too young."

"So much the better for you. And what is your little name?"

"I am Starwood Burney;[14] but I should like you to call me Star, as
my papa does."

"That I will, my German aster!"

"Aster is Latin; I have begun Latin. But do please go, I have so much
to do, and he will be so very angry,--so very, very cross!"

"How dare you say so, when he has never even tied your hands together!
You should not be hurt nor disgraced, little Starling; if I were
there, I would be punished instead, for I have twice your strength.
But you should try to love him while you fear him."

"You speak like a great man, and I will try. But please to go now, for
I find this very hard."

I left him, having selfishly shrunk from the necessity to interrogate
Iskar.

I stole to his door. I was really electrified as I stood,--not with
envy, but with amazement! He was already a wonderful mechanist. Such
sallies of execution were to me tremendous, but his tone did not charm
me, and I imagined it might be the defect of his instrument that it
sounded thin and cold, unlike my notion altogether, and frosty as the
frost without. Clearly and crisply it saluted me as I entered. The
room was like ours,--the little one's and mine; but it was gayly
adorned with pictures of the lowest order (such as are hawked about
the streets in England), and only conspicuous from their unnaturally
vivid coloring. They were chiefly figures of ladies dancing, or of
gentlemen brandishing the sword and helmet,--theatrical subjects, as I
afterwards discovered. Iskar was sitting before his desk, and had his
face from me. As I approached, my awe was doubled at his performance,
for I beheld Corelli's solos. I had heard of those from Davy. Another
desk was also near him, and a second violin-case stood upon the floor.
I asked him very modestly whether they were mine. He replied, without
regarding me, "That sheet of paper has your exercise upon it, and if
you cannot play it, you are to look in Marenthal's Prolusion, which is
in the bureau under the desk. You are to take all these things into
your own room."

There was something in the tones of the blouse--he was yet in
blouse--that irritated me intensely. His voice was defined as that of
his violin, and to the full as frosty. I was only too happy to retire.
Then, sitting upon my own bed, I examined the exercise. It was
drearily indistinct,--a copy, and I could make nothing of it. The mere
Germanisms of the novel rests and signs appalled me. I could neither
handle the violin nor steady the bow; but I had carefully borne in
mind the methods I had observed when I had had opportunity, and I
stooped to take this child of music from its cradle. It was no more
mine own than I had expected; an awkward bulky frame it had, and I did
not feel to love it nor to bring it to my heart. Something must be
done, I felt, and I returned to the organ-room. I found the Prolusion,
as Iskar said,--an awfully Faustish tome, with rusty clasps, the
letters worn off the back. I was in doom certainly. It was close black
national type, and I pored and bored myself over it,--leaf after
leaf,--until, blissfully, I arrived at the very exercise prepared for
me. It was presented in illustration, and there were saw-like
enunciations of every step; but half the words were unknown to me, and
I grew rigid with despair. "Oh!" I cried aloud, "if some one would
only tell me! if Davy were only here! if Lenhart Davy knew!" Still I
slackened not in my most laughable labor, endeavoring to interpret
such words as I could not translate by their connection with others I
did know, by their look and make,--their euphony. I was vocalizing
them very loud, and had made out already the first position, when a
rattle of the closet lock turned me all over cold. I listened, it came
again; a tremendous "So!" followed, and the door, opening, displayed
Aronach himself in the glories of a morning-gown. How could he have
got in there, and how have come out upon me so suddenly without any
warning? and above all, how would he behave to me, finding me so
ignorant? I believe that on account of my very ignorance I found favor
in his sight,--he truly wise; for, merely alluding to my condition in
this form, "Thou hast shown thyself faithful, only keep thy faith," he
bade me bring my traps in there, and assured me--merely by his
aspect--that he would clear every stone from my path.

When I returned he was standing between the organ and the window: a
grander picture could not be perpetrated of the life-long laboring
and, for love's sake, aspiring artist. His furrowed forehead was clear
as rutted snow in the serene of sunlight as he appeared then; and
through all the sternness with which he spoke I discerned the
gentleness of art's impression. And after the most careful initiation
into the simplest mechanical process, he dismissed me to work alone,
nor did I relax from that one exercise for a week.

But a great deal chanced in that week besides. We spent each day
alike, except Sunday. On other days we breakfasted very soon after it
was light, on milk porridge, or bread and coffee. But sometimes
Aronach would breakfast alone in his cave, which was that very closet
I mentioned, and in which the day must have been developed about as
decidedly as beneath the ground. However, he had his lamp in there,
and his private escritoire, besides all kinds of books and papers,
that were seldom produced in our presence, and then only one at a
time.

The kitten's basket was there too, and there were shelves upon
shelves, containing napery and all sorts of oddities, that had their
nest there after being hatched in crannies of the old man's brain. The
first time I took a peep I discerned my own violin, carefully enough
housed, but quite above my reach. I fumed a little, of course, but did
not betray myself; and it was well I did not, as Iskar and little
Starwood both practised on common fiddles scraping could not rasp, nor
inexperience injure.

After breakfast we worked till noon under lock and key. At noon we
dined, and at two o'clock were sent to walk. I do not know whether I
put down Aronach as a tyrant. He must, at least, be so written, in
that his whims, no less than his laws, were unalterable. A whim it
certainly was that we should always walk one way, and the same
distance every day, unless he sent us on any special errand. This
promenade, though monotonous, became dear to me, and I soon learned to
appreciate the _morale_ of that _régime_. We could not go to Cecilia,
which had its village only two miles off, and whose soft blue gentle
hill was near enough to woo, and distant enough to tempt the dreamer,
nor would our guide at hand permit us to approach the precinct
consecrated to such artistic graduation as we had not yet attained.

In the mornings Aronach was either absent abroad instructing, or
writing at home. But we never got at him, and were not suffered to
apply to him until the evening. As we could not play truant unless we
had battered down the doors, so we could not associate with each other
unreservedly, except in our walks; and on those occasions, pretty
often, our master came too, calling on his friends as he passed their
houses, while we paraded up and down; but whenever he was by our side,
silent as a ruminant ox, and awful as Apis to the Egyptians for
Starwood and for me. When he came not, it would have been charming,
but for Iskar, who was either too fine to talk, or else had nothing at
his command to say, and whose deportment was so drearily sarcastic
that neither of us, his companions, ever ventured an original or a
sympathizing remark.

On my first Sunday I took Starwood to church,--that is, we preceded
Aronach, who was lecturing Iskar, and sent us on beforehand. The
little one was bright this morning, and as I looked upon his
musically built brow, and trembling color, and expressive eyes,--blue
as the air at evening, and full of that sort of light,--I could not
make clear to myself how it was that he so disliked his work, and
drooped beneath it in the effort to master his frail body by his
struggling soul. We had turned into the place of the church,--the
leafless lindens were whispering to it,--and we rested by the stone
basin, while the bells came springing through the frost-clear day
like--yet how unlike--England! I was afraid my small companion would
be cold, and I put one of his long little hands into my pocket with my
own, while I made him tuck the other into both his warm gloves, till,
by degrees,--having coaxed and comforted him to the utmost,--he told
me more about himself than I had known before. He was extremely timid
to talk, shy as a fawn, even to me. But at last I made out
satisfactorily the secret of his antipathy to his violin. I cannot
remember all his words,--besides, they were too infantine to write;
but he described himself as having spent that most forlorn of all
untended childhoods which befalls the motherless offspring of the
needy artist in England. His father had lived in London and taught
music, but had left him constantly alone; and I also discovered he had
been, and was still, an organist. The child assured me his mamma had
been a beautiful player, but that no one ever opened her grand piano,
which stood in a parlor above the street.

"I always knew I was to grow up to music," said Starwood; "for mamma
had told me so, and she taught me my notes when I was only four years
old. When she died, no one taught me; and while papa was out all day,
I played with my toys and sat upon the stairs. One day some men came
up and nearly fell over me. I ran into the parlor, and they came too.
They knocked the piano about, and began to take its legs off. I called
out to them, 'You must not touch that,--it is my mamma's!'

"They did not take any notice, but made a great noise, and at last
they carried it away--all of it--upon their shoulders. I saw it go
downstairs, and I sat there all day and cried; I was very miserable, I
know. Papa came home at last; when I was so unhappy I thought I must
die, and it was all in the dark, and very cold. He carried me in his
arms, and made me tell him why I cried. I said 'Because of the piano;'
and he told me he had sold it because it was so large, and because he
wanted the money. I know he was very poor, Charles; for a gentleman
who was very kind to him gave him some more money to send me here, or
I could not have come. But I wish he had kept me at home and taught me
himself."

"But how," I replied, "can you be sorry now? We ought to be most
gloriously happy to find ourselves here. But you fret, my dear little
boy, and mope, and that makes you thin, and takes the strength out of
you that you want for music."

"Ah! that is not it. You don't know, Charles, how I feel; I know you
don't, for you love your violin."

"I should think I did!"

"Well, I am strange to it, and don't love it,--at least, don't love to
play it."

"But why did you not tell your father so before he sent you here? You
know you will never do anything well that you don't love to do,--it is
impossible. And not to love the violin, Star, for shame!"

"It is not that,--oh, don't be angry with me!--but my music is in the
beautiful cold keys."

"Darling little Star! I beg your pardon; but then, why don't you learn
the piano?"

"But Charles, I cannot. I was sent here to learn the violin, and I
_must_ study it. Aronach does not let any one study the pianoforte
under him now."

"He did then?"

"Yes, a long time ago, when he lived in another place, about thirty
miles off. Have you heard Aronach play the organ?"

"No; have you?"

"Oh! every Sunday."

"You don't say so, Star! is it not delicious?"

"Charles, I like it best of all the days in the week, because he
plays. Such different playing from what they have at church in
England!"

"I shall go up to the organ and see him play."

"Charles, Charles, don't; please don't,--we never do!"

"Then I shall be the first, for go I must. There is precious Aronach
himself. I will run after him wherever he goes."

I did so most rudely--forsaking Starwood, who did not dare to follow
me; but I would not miss the opportunity. I spun after Aronach so
noiselessly as that he had no notion I was following, though in
general he had eyes behind; and he did not perceive me until the
service had absolutely begun. Then I made myself visible, and caught a
frown, which was accompanied by a helpless condition truly edifying;
for his arms and hands and eyes and feet were all equally on service.
I therefore remained, and made out more about the instrument than I
had made out my whole life before. His was a genuine organ-hand, that
could stretch itself indefinitely, and yet double up so crawlingly
that the fingers, as they lay, were like stems of corrugated ivory;
and I watched only less than I listened. The choir--so full and
perfect, trained to every individual--mounted its effects, as it were,
upon those of the controlling harmonies. There was a depth in these
that supported their air-waving tones, as pillars solid and polished a
vaulted roof, where shadows waver and nestle. I found a book, and sang
at intervals, but generally preferred to receive the actual
impression. I think my first mother-feeling for Germany was born that
Sunday in pleasurable pain.

None can know who has not felt--none feel who has not heard--the spell
of those haunting services in the land of Luther! The chorale so grave
and powerful, with its interpieces so light and florid, like slender
fretworks on a marble shrine,--the unisonous pause, the antiphonal
repose, the deep sense of worship stirred by the sense of sound. From
that Sunday I always went with Aronach, unbidden, but unforbidden; and
as I learned to be very expert in stopping, I substituted very
speedily the functionary who had performed the office before my
advent.

FOOTNOTE:

[14] There is no question but that Starwood Burney is intended for a
portrait of Sterndale Bennett. Mendelssohn was his friend from
boyhood, and aided him greatly with his suggestions, though it is
doubtful whether Bennett ever studied with him. It was through
Mendelssohn's influence that he brought out Bach's music in London. He
was also a pupil of the Leipsic Conservatory.




CHAPTER XXVII.


It cannot be supposed that I forgot my home, or that I failed to
institute an immediate correspondence, which was thus checked in the
bud. Aronach, finding me one night, after we had all retired, with my
little ink-bottle on the floor and myself outsprawled writing upon my
knees close into my lamp, very coolly carried my sheet, pen, and ink
away, and informed me that he never permitted his pupils to write home
at all, or to write anything except what he set them to do.

I should have revolted outright against this restriction but for a
saving discovery I made on the morrow,--that our master himself
dismissed from his own hand a bulletin of our health and record of our
progress once a month. Precious specimens, no doubt, they were, these,
of hard-hearted fact! Neither were we allowed to receive letters
ourselves from home. Only simple communications were permitted to
himself; and the effect of this rule, so autocratic, was desperately
painful upon me at first. I hungered for some sweet morsel of English,
served up in English character; I wanted to hear more than that all
were well; and as for Lenhart Davy, had not my love informed my
memory, I should have forgotten him altogether. But it was very soon I
began to realize that this judicious interdiction lent a tonic
bitterness to my life. I was completely abstracted, and upon that
passage of my inwardly eventful history I can never glance back
without a quiet tear or two; it was heavenly in its unabsolved and
absolute serenity. It was the one mood that befitted a growing heart
too apt to burn,--a busy brain too apt to vision,--if that head and
heart were ever to be raised from the valley of material life into the
mountain heights of art.

I fear my remembrances are dull just here, for the glory that touched
them was of the moment, and too subtle to be retrieved; but it is
impossible not just to remind myself of them before returning to my
adventure-maze.

For six months, that passed as swiftly as six weeks of a certain
existence, we went on together--I should have said--hand-in-hand, but
that my Starwood's diffident melancholy and Iskar's travestied hauteur
would have held me back, and I was ardent to impel myself forward. So,
though at first I had to work almost to desperation in order to join
the evening contrapuntal class, I soon left the other two behind, and
Aronach taught me alone,--which was an advantage it would be
impossible to overrate. Not that he ever commended,--it was not in
him; he was too exigent, too stern; his powers never condescended; he
was never known to qualify; he was never personally made acquaintance
with. Something of the hermit blended mystically with his acumen, so
that the primary advantage of our position was his supreme standard,
insensibly our own also,--the secondary, our undisturbed seclusion.

As I said, we walked the same distance day by day. Nothing is uniform
to a soul really set on the idealities of art. Everything, though it
changes not, suggests to the mind of the musician. Though not a
full-grown mind, I had all joy in that unchanging route; for as the
year grew and rounded, all, as it were, aspired without changing.
Meditation mellowed every circumstance till it ripened to an
unalterable charm. I always walked with Starwood, who still made me
very anxious; suddenly and increasingly so pale and frail he became
that I fully expected him to die that spring. Indeed, he hardly
cleared it; and I should have mentioned my fears to Aronach but that
he seemed fully aware of all I feared. But instead of getting rid of
the weakling, as I dreaded he might choose to do, he physicked him and
kept him in his bed-box twice or thrice a week, and taciturnly
indulged him; giving him hot possets at night, and cooling drinks by
day. The poor little fellow was very grateful, but still sad; and I
was astonished that Aronach still expected him to practise, unless he
was in bed, and to write, except his head ached. The indefinite
disorder very seldom reached that climax though, and chiefly asserted
itself in baby-yawns and occasional whimpers, constant weariness, and
entire loss of appetite. I at length discovered his age, and Iskar's
also. The latter had passed eleven, but was not so nearly twelve as I;
the first was scarcely nine, and so small he might have been only six.
It struck me he would not be much older, and I had learned to love him
too well in his infantine and affecting weakness. I ventured, one day,
to ask Aronach whether his father knew he was ill. I was answered,--

"He is not ill."

"But, sir, he is low and weak!"

"He will always be weak while thou art petting him. Who can take more
care of him than I? His father?"

"Oh, master! I know you are good; but what if he dies?"

"His work will not have killed him, nor his weakness. If people are to
die, they die; if they are to live, they live."

I was silenced, not convinced; but from that hour I did not think he
would die; nor did he.

Aronach was strict, he never departed from a rule; it was his chief
and salient characteristic. He never held what one may call
conversation with us on any subject except our studies, and then it
was in exemplification, not suggestively. It was a beneficial reserve,
perhaps, but I could not have endured it forever, and might have
become impatient but for the auspices of the season; it was the very
beginning of May. Though shut up to a great extent, as we were, the
weather made itself an entrance, blue sky swelled, and the glow of
morning woke me before dawn. The lindens near the fountain began to
blossom, and in the garden of the church the oak-leaves clustered. I
saw nothing of the country yet, and could only dream of unknown beauty
in untraversed paths. The Cecilia examinations approached. Aronach
attended almost every day at the school. I knew just so much and no
more, and as much expected to assist thereat as I should have hoped to
come of age on my twelfth birthday. My birthday was in that month of
May, in the third week; and though I was innocent of the fact, it was
a fact that it was one of Cecilia's feast-days as well as my own. It
was, however, such a delicious morning that it nearly sent me mad up
in my little room to be mewed there, when such thousands upon
thousands roamed wheresoever they would; for I never took it into
account how many of those wanderers would rejoice to be so shut up as
I was, could they only rest. And it struck me that at least one day in
the year one ought to be permitted to do exactly as one desired, even
were the desire to drown one's self the prevalent aspiration. There
are times when it is not only natural, but necessary, to rebel
against authority; so that had I not been locked in, I would have
certainly escaped and made a ramble on my own responsibility; for I
should have acted upon as pure impulse as when--usually industrious
enough as I was--I laid down my fiddle and wasted my time.

As I gazed upon the window and smelt the utter sweetness of the
atmosphere, hardly so much air as flower spirit, the voice of perfume,
I was wishful of the wings of all the flies, and envious of the
butterflies that blundered in and floated out. I am sure I had been
idle at least an hour, and had no prospect of taking heed to my ways,
so long as the sky was blue as that sky, and the breeze blew in, when
I felt, rather than heard, a soft little knock at the door. I fancied
it was the servant dashing her broomstick upon the landing; but in a
moment it was repeated, and I was very shy to take any notice, feeling
that a goblin could let itself in, and had better do so than be
admitted. Then I was roused indeed, and my own inaction scared me, for
I recognized Starwood's voice.

"Charles, I want to come in,--mayn't I a minute, please?"

"Really, Star, it is too bad of you to give me such a turn! How can I
open the door? Pray come in directly, and tell me what is the matter."

He boggled at the lock for a minute or two, but at last admitted
himself.

"Why, Star, how frightened you look! Have you been flogged at last?
and is the master home already?"

"No, no, Charles! Something most extraordinary."

I really could but laugh, the child repeated the words with such an
awe.

"A gentleman, Charles, has come. He opened my door while I was
practising. I should have been dreadfully frightened, but he was so
kind, and came in so gently. He thought you were here, Charles, and
asked for you; he says he does not know your name, but that he could
tell me whether you were here if I would describe you. I said how pale
you were, with such dark eyes, and about your playing, and he said,--

"'All right, go and fetch him, or send him to me: will you be so
kind?'"

"How could you be quite sure? It may be some one for Iskar, who is
pale, and has dark eyes."

"He said it was the violin that came at Christmas, I was to send; and
you came at Christmas. Besides, he looks very like a friend you would
have; he is not like anybody else."

"What is he like, Star?"

"His face is so very bright and clever that I could not look at it;
but I saw his beautiful curling hair. I never saw such curling hair."

"Come in with me, then, Star."

"No, he said I was not to come too, that I might go on with my music.
He calls it 'music,' but I don't think it is much like it."

Now, I knew who was there as well as if an angel had spoken to me and
said, "It is he for whom you waited." Had I not known in very
assurance, I should have forced my little friend to go back with me,
that I might not meet alone a stranger; as it was, I only longed to
fly, and to fly alone into that presence, for which I then felt I had
been waiting, though I had known it not.

I rushed from my little prison enfranchised, ecstatic; but I
misapprehended my own sensations. The magnetic power was so appalling
that as I reached the threshold of that other room a dark shock came
over my eyes, and partly from my haste, in part from that dazzling
blindness, I staggered and fell across the doorway, and could not try
to rise.

But his arm was round me,--before I fell, I felt it; and as I lay I
was crushed, abandoned in very worship. None worship as the
child-enthusiast save the enthusiast who worshipped even as a child. I
scarcely tried to rise; but he lifted me with that strong and slender
arm, and set me upon my feet. Before he spoke I spoke, but I gasped so
wildly that my words are not in my power to recall. I only remember
that I named him "our Conductor--the Conductor!" and that still, with
his light touch on my shoulder, he turned his head aside. I looked up
freely then; and the glance I then caught of that brow, those eyes
half averted, half bent upon me with the old pitying sweetness, partly
shaded by earthly sympathy, but for the most part lifted into light
beyond my knowledge,--the one glimpse forewarned me not to yield to
the emotions he raised within me, lest I should trouble him more than
needed. It was not a minute, I am sure, before I mastered myself and
stood before him firmly.

"Sir, the Herr Aronach is at the Cecilia School to-day; it is the
first day of the grand examination,--at least I believe so; I know
they are all very busy there, and have been so for some time. I don't
think the master will be home until quite the evening, for he told us
to dine alone; but if you will allow me, I will run and bring you a
coach from the Kell Platz, which will take you to Cecilia in an
hour,--I have heard the master say so."

He was looking towards the window; and while I spoke, his face, so
exquisitely pale, grew gradually warm and bright, his cheek mantled,
his eyes laughed within the lashes.

"All very good and wise and amiable, most amiable!" said he; "and such
pretty German too! But I came to see you, and not your master, here! I
have been a long time coming, but I could not get here before, because
I had not done my lessons. I have finished them now, and want a game
of play. Will you have a game with me?"

Before I could answer, he resumed, in tones of the most ravishing
gayety,--

"And you are all so pale,--so pale that I am ashamed of you! What have
you been all doing?"

"Practising, sir,--at least not I, for I have been idle all the
morning, for the very first time since I came here, I assure you. I
kept thinking and thinking, and expecting and expecting, though I
could not tell what, and now I know."

"But I am still very much ashamed of Aronach. Does he lock you up?"
with a star of mischief shining from the very middle of each eye.

"Yes, sir, always, as well as the others, of course. I like it very
much too; it is so safe."

"Not always, it seems. Well, now let us have a race to the river; and
then if you are pale still, I shall take you to Cecilia, and show
somebody that it is a question whether he can keep you at home, for
all he bolts you in. The day is so fine, so beautiful, that I think
the music itself may have a holiday."

"Sir, do you really mean it? Oh, if you do, pray let us go to Cecilia
_now_; for perhaps there is music to hear, and oh! it is so very,
_very_ long since I heard any."

"Is it so dear to you that you would rather seek it than all the
sunshine and all the heart of spring? Ah! too young to find that
anything is better than music, and more to be desired."

"Yes, sir, yes! please to take me. I won't be in the way, it will be
enough to walk by you; I don't want you to talk."

"But I do want to talk; I cannot keep quiet. I have a lady's tongue,
and yours, I fancy, is not much shorter. We will therefore go now."

"This moment, sir? Oh! I would rather go than have the festival over
again."

"The festival! the festival! It _is_ the festival! Is it not to-day a
festival, and _every_ day in May?"

He looked as he spoke so divinely happy that it is so the angels must
appear in their everlasting spring. I rushed into my room and rummaged
for my cap, also for a pair of new gloves; but I was not very long,
though I shook so violently that it was a task to pull on those skins.
Returning, I found him still at the window; he was leaning upon the
bureau, not near the harpsichord, not before the organ, but gazing,
child-like, into the bright blue morning. He was dressed in a summer
coat, short and very loose, that hung almost in folds upon his
delicate figure. The collar, falling low, revealed the throat, so
white, so regal; and through the button-hole fluttered the ribbon of
the Chevalier. He carried also a robe-like cloak upon his arm, lined
with silk and amply tasselled. I ventured to take it from him, but he
gently, and yet forcibly, drew it again to himself, saying, "It is too
heavy for thee. May I not already say 'thou'?"

"Oh, sir, if you will, but let me go first; it is so dark always upon
the stairs."

"One does not love darkness, truly; we will escape together."

He took my hand, and I tried to lead him; but after all, it was he who
led me step by step. I did not know the road to Cecilia, and I said
so.

"Oh, I suppose not; sly Aronach! But I do, and that is sufficient, is
it not? Why, the color is coming back already. And I see your eyes
begin to know me. I am so glad. Ah! they tell more now than they will
tell some day."

"Sir, you are too good, but I thank you. I like to feel well, and I
feel more than well to-day; I am too glad, I think."

"Never too well or glad, it is not possible. Never too bright and
hopeful. Never too blissfully rejoicing. Tell me your name, if you
please."

"Sir, my name is nothing."

"That is better than _Norval_." He laughed, as at himself.

"Sir, however did you get to hear that? O!"--I quite screamed as the
reminiscence shook me,--"oh, sir, did you write the 'Tone-Wreath'?"

He gave me a look which seemed to drink up my soul. "I plucked a
garland, but it was beyond the Grampian Hills."

"You _did_ write it! I knew it when I heard it, sir. I am so
delighted! I knew the instant she played it, and she thought so too;
but of course we could not be quite sure."

He made the very slightest gesture of impatience. "Never mind the
'Tone-Wreath'! There are May-bells enough on the hills that we are to
go to."

I was insensibly reminded of his race; but its bitterness was all
sheathed in beauty when I looked again. So beautiful was he that I
could not help looking at his face. So we are drawn to the evening
star, so to the morning roses; but with how different a spell! For
just where theirs is closed, did his begin its secret, still
attraction; the loveliness, the symmetry were lost as the majestic
spirit seized upon the soul through the sight, and conquered.

"You have not told me your name. Is it so difficult for me to
pronounce? I will try very hard to say it, and I wish to know it."

No "I will" was ever so irresistible.--"Charles Auchester."

"That is a tell-tale name. But I can never forget what was written for
me on your forehead the day you were so kind to me in a foreign
country. Do you like me, Charles,--well enough to wish to know me?"

I can never describe the innocent regality of his manner here,--it was
something never to be imagined, that voice in that peculiar key.

"Sir, I know how many friends you must have, and how they must admire
you. I don't think any of them love you as I do, and always did ever
since that day. I wish I could tell you, but it's of no use. I can't,
though I quite burn to tell you, and to make you know. I do love you
better than I love my life, and you are the only person I love better
than music. I would go to the other end of the world, and never see
you any more, rather than I would be in your way or tire you. Will you
believe me?"

"Come!" he answered brightly, delicately, "I know all you wish to say,
because I can feel myself; but I could not bear you at the other end
of the world just now, because I like you near me; and were you and I
to go away from each other, as we must, I should still feel you near
me, for whatever is, or has been, is forever to me."

"Sir, I can only thank you, and that means more than I can say; but I
cannot think why you like me. It is most exquisite, but I do not
understand it."

He smiled, and his eye kindled. "I shall not tell you, I see you do
not know; I do not wish for you to know. But tell me now, will you
not, do you enter the school this semester?"

"Yes, sir, I believe so,--at least, I came here on purpose; but
Aronach does not tell us much, you know, sir."

"Is that tall young gentleman to enter?"

"Yes, sir,--Marc Iskar."

"And the least,--how do you name him?"

Like a flash of lightning a conception struck me through and through.

"Sir, he is called Starwood Burney, from England. How I do wish I
might tell you something!"

"You can tell me anything; there is plenty of time and room, and no
one to hear, if it be a pretty little secret."

"It is a secret, but not a little one, nor pretty either. It is about
Starwood. I don't think I ought to trouble you about it, and yet I
must tell you, because I think you can do anything you please."

"Like a prince in the Arabian tales," he answered brightly; "I fear I
am poor in comparison with such, for I can only help in _one_ way."

"And that one way is the very way I want, sir. Starwood loves the
pianoforte. I have seen him change all over when he talked of it, as
if it were his real life. It is not a real life he lives with that
violin."

"I wish it had been thyself, whose real life it is, my child," he
replied, with a tenderness I could ill brook, could less account for;
"but still thy wish shall be mine. Would the little one go with me? He
seems terrified to be spoken to, and it would make my heart beat to
flutter him."

"Sir, that is just like you to say so; but I am very certain he would
soon love you,--not as I do, that would be impossible, but so much
that you would not be sorry you had taken him away. But oh! if I had
known that you would take and teach, I would never have taken up the
violin, but have come and thrown myself at your feet, sir, and have
held upon you till you promised to take me. I thought, sir, somehow
that you did not teach."

"Understand me, then, that what I say I say to satisfy you: you are
better as you are, better than you could be with me. I am a wanderer,
and it is not my right to teach; I am bound to another craft, and the
only one for the perfecting of which it is not my right to call myself
poor. Do you understand, Charles?"

"I think, sir, that you mean you make music, and that therefore you
have no time for the dirty work."

He broke into a burst of laughter, like joy-bells. "There is as much
dirty work, however, in what you call _making_ music. But what I meant
for you to understand was this, that I do not take money for
instructing; because that would be to take the bread from the mouths
of hundreds I love and honor. I have money enough; and you know how
sweet it is even to give money,--how much sweeter to give what cannot
be bought by money! I shall take this little friend of mine to my own
home, if he will go and I am permitted to do so; and I shall treat him
as my son, because he will, indeed, be my music-child, and no more
indebted to me than I am to music, or than we all are to Jehovah."

"Sir, you are certainly a Jew if you say 'Jehovah;' I was quite sure
of it before, and I am so pleased."

"I cannot contradict thee, but I am almost sorry thou knowest there
are even such people as Jews."

"Why so, sir? Pray tell me. I should have thought that _you_, before
all other persons, would have rejoiced over them."

"Why so, indeed! but because the mystery of their very name is enough
to break the head, and perhaps the heart. But now of this little one:
he must, indeed, be covered as a bird in the nest, and shall be. And
if I turn him not forth a strong-winged wonder, thou wilt stand up and
have to answer for him,--is it not so?"

"Sir, I am certain he will play wonderfully upon what he calls those
'beautiful cold keys.'"

"Ah!" he answered dreamily, "and so, indeed, they are, whose very
tones are but as different shadows of the same one-colored light, the
ice-blue darkness, and the snowy azure blaze. He has right, if he
thinks them cold, to find them _alone_ beautiful." He spoke as if in
sleep.

"Sir, I do not know what you mean, for I never heard even
Milans-André."

"You are to hear him, then; it is positively needful."

Again the raillery pointed every word, as if arrows "dipped in balm."

"I mean that I scarcely know what those keys are like, for I never
heard them really played, except by one young lady. I did not find the
'Tone-Wreath' cold, but I thought, when she played with Santonio, that
her playing was cold,--cold compared with his; for he was playing, as
you know, sir, the violin."

"You are right; yes. The violin is the violet!"

These words, vividly pronounced, and so mystical to the uninitiated,
were as burning wisdom to my soul. I could have claimed them as my
own, so exactly did they respond to my own unexpressed necessities.
But indeed, and in truth, the most singular trait of the presence
beside me was that nothing falling from his lips surprised me. I was
prepared for all, though everything was new. He did not talk
incessantly,--on the contrary, his remarks seemed sudden, as a breeze
up-borne and dying into the noonday. There was that in them which
cannot be conveyed, although conserved,--the tones, the manner, so
changeful, yet all cast in grace unutterable; passing from vagrant,
never wanton mirth, into pungent, but never supercilious gravity. Such
recollection only proves that the beautiful essence flows not well
into the form of words,--for I remember every word he spoke,--but
rather dies in being uttered forth, itself as music.

It was dusty in the highway, and we met no one for at least a mile
except the peasants, who passed into the landscape as part of its
picture. The intense green of May, and its quickening blossoms,
strewed every nook and plantation; but the sweetness of the country,
so exuberant just there, only seemed to frame, with fitting ornament,
the one idea I contemplated,--that he was close at hand. There had
been much sun, and one was naturally inclined to shade in the
thrilling May heats, which permeate the veins almost like love's
fever, and are as exciting to the pulses.

At last we came to a brook, a lovely freshet, broadening into a
mill-stream; for we could see far off in the clear air the flash of
that wheel, and hear its last murmuring fall. But here at hand it was
all lonely, unspanned by any bridge, and having its feathery banks
unspoiled by any clearing hand. A knot of beautiful beech-trees threw
dark kisses on the trembling water; there were wildest rushes here,
and the thick spring leaves of the yet unbloomed forget-me-not on
either hand. The blue hill of Cecilia lay yet before us, but something
in my companion's face made me conjecture that here he wished to
rest. Before he even suggested it I pulled out my cambric
handkerchief, and running on before him, laid it beneath the drooping
beech-boughs on the swelling grass. I came back to him again, and
entreated him to repose. He even flushed with satisfaction at my
request, which I made, as I ever do, rather impertinently. He ran,
too, with me, and taking out his own handkerchief, which was a
royal-purple silk, he spread it beside mine, and drew me to that
throne with his transparent fingers upon my hand. I say "transparent,"
for they were as though the roseate blood shone through, and the
wandering violet veins showed the clearness of the unfretted palm. But
it was a hand too refined for model beauty, too thin and rare for the
youth, the almost boyhood, that shone on his forehead and in his
unwearied eye. The brightness of heaven seemed to pour itself upon my
soul as I sat beside him and felt that no one in the whole world was
at that moment so near him as I. He pulled a few rushes from the
margin, and began to weave a sort of basket. So fleetly his fingers
twisted and untwisted themselves that it was as if he were accustomed
to do nothing but sit and weave green rushes the livelong day.

"Pull me some more!" he said at length imploringly; and I, who had
been absorbed in those clear fingers playing, looked up at him as I
stretched my arm. His eyes shone with the starlight of pure
abstraction, and I answered not except by gathering the rushes,
breaking them off, and laying them one by one across his knees. The
pretty work was nearly finished; it was the loveliest green casket I
could have fancied, with a plaited handle. It looked like a fairy
field-flung treasure. I wished it were for me. When it was quite
ready, and as complete and perfect as Nature's own work, he rose, and
seizing the lowest branch of the swaying beech grove, hung the
plaything upon it and said, "I wish it were filled with ripe red
strawberries."

"Why so, sir?" I ventured.

"Because one would like to imagine a little child finding a green
basket by the dusty way, filled with strawberries."

We arose, and again walked on.

"Sir, I would rather have the basket than the strawberries."

"I wish a little child may be of your mind. Were you happy, Charles,
when you were a little child?"

"Sir, I was always longing to be a man. I never considered what it was
to be a little child."

"Thou art a boy, and that is to be a man-child,--the beautiful fate!
But it is thy beautiful fate to teach others also, as only children
teach."

"I, sir,--how?"

"Charles, a man may be always longing to be an angel, and never
consider what it is to be a man."

His voice was as a sudden wind springing up amidst solitary leaves, it
was so fitful, so vaguely sweet. I looked upon him indeed for the
first time with trembling, since I had been with him that day. He had
fallen into a stiller step, for we had reached the foot of the ascent.
It never occurred to me that I was not expected at Cecilia. I thought
of nothing but that I should accompany him. He suddenly again
addressed me in English.

"Did St. Michel ever recover the use of his arm?"

I was quite embarrassed. "I never asked about him, sir; but I daresay
he did."

"I thought you would have known. You _should_ have asked, I think.
Was he a rich man or a poor man?"

"How do you mean, sir? He was well off, I should suppose, for he used
to dress a great deal, and had a horse, and taught all over the town.
Mr. Davy said he was as popular as Giardini."

"Mr. Davy was who,--your godfather?"

"My musical godfather I should say, sir. He took me to the festival,
and had I not accidentally met him I should never have gone there,
have never seen you. Oh, sir!--"

"Nothing is accidental that happens to you, to such as you. But I
should have been very sorry not to have seen you. I thought you were a
little messenger from the other world."

"It does seem very strange, sir,--at least two things especially."

"What is the first, then?"

"First, that I should serve you; and the second, that you should like
me."

"No, believe me, it is not strange,"--he still spoke in that beautiful
pure English, swift and keen, as his German was mild and slow,--"not
strange that you should serve me, because there was a secret agreement
between us that we should either serve the other. Had you been in my
place, I should have run to fetch you water; but I fear I should have
spilled a drop or two. And how could I but like you when you came
before me like something of my own in that crowd, that multitude in
nothing of me?"

"Sir," I answered, to save myself from saying what I really felt, "how
beautifully you speak English!"

He resumed in German: "That is nothing, because we can have no real
language. I make myself think in all. I dream first in this, and then
in that; so that, amidst the floating fragments, as in the strange
mixture we call an _orchestra_, some accent may be expressed from the
many voices of the language of our unknown home."

As he said these words, his tones, so clear and reverent, became
mystical and inward. I was absolved from communion with that soul. His
eye, travelling onwards, was already with the lime-trees at the summit
of the hill we had nearly reached, and he appeared to have forgotten
me. I felt how frail, how dissoluble, were the fiery links that bound
my feeble spirit to that strong immortal. But how little I knew it
yet!




CHAPTER XXVIII.


The school of Cecilia was not only at the summit of the hill, it was
the only building on the summit; it was isolated, and in its isolation
grand. There were cottages in orchards, vine-gardens, fertile lands,
an ancient church, sprinkled upon the sides, or nestling in the
slopes; but itself looked lonely and consecrated, as in verity it
might be named. A belt of glorious trees, dark and dense as a Druid
grove, surrounded with an older growth the modern superstructure; but
its basis had been a feudal ruin, whose entrance still remained; a
hall, a wide waste of room, of rugged symmetry and almost twilight
atmosphere. A court-yard in front was paved with stone, and here were
carriages and unharnessed horses feeding happily. The doorway of the
hall was free; we entered together, and my companion left me one
moment while he made some arrangements with the porter, who was quite
alone in his corner. Otherwise silence reigned, and also it seemed
with solitude; for no one peered among the strong square pillars that
upheld as rude a gallery,--the approach to which was by a sweeping
staircase of the brightest oak with noble balustrades. Two figures in
bronze looked down from the landing-place on either hand, and as we
passed between them I felt their size, if not their beauty, overawe me
as the shadow of the entrance. They were, strange to say, not
counterparts, though companion forms of the same head, the same face,
the same dun laurel crown; but the one gathered its drapery to its
breast, and stretched its hand beckoningly towards the portal,--the
other with outstretched arm pointed with an expression almost
amounting to menace down the gallery. In niched archways there, one
door after another met the eye, massive and polished, but all closed.

I implicitly trusted in my companion. I felt sure he possessed a charm
to open all those doors, and I followed him as he still lightly, as if
upon grass, stepped from entrance to entrance, not pausing until he
reached the bend of the gallery. Here was a door unlike the
others,--wider, slighter, of cloth and glass; and stealing from within
those media, with a murmur soft as incense, came a mist of choral
sounds, confusing me and captivating me at once, so that I did not
care to stir until the mist dissolved and ceased, and I was yet by my
companion's side without the door.

"We may enter now, I think," he said; for he had waited reverently as
I, and he gently pushed those folds.

They slid back, and we entered a narrow lobby, very dim and
disenchanted looking. Still softly we proceeded to another door
within, which I had not discovered, and he touched that too with an
air of subtile and still authority. I was dazzled the first instant;
but he took my hand directly, and drew me forwards with him to a seat
in some region of enchantment. As I sat by him there I soon recovered
myself to the utmost, and beheld before me a sight which I shall not
easily forget, nor ever cease to hold as it was presented to me on
that occasion.

It was a vast and vaulted room; whether of delicate or decided
architecture I could not possibly declare, such a dream it was of
wreaths and mystic floral arches. Pillars twined with gold-bloomed
lime-branches rose burdened with them to the roof, there mixing into
the long festoons of oak-leaf that hung as if they grew there from the
gray-brown rafters. Everywhere was a drooping odor that had been
oppressive, most unendurably sweet, but for the strong air wafted and
ruffling through the open windows on either hand.

We were sitting quite behind all others, on the loftiest tier of
seats, that were raised step by step so gently upwards to the back,
and beneath us were seats all full, where none turned nor seemed to
talk; for all eyes were surely allured and riveted by the scenery to
the fronting end. It was a lofty, arched recess, spanning the extreme
width of the hall; a window, half a dome, of glass poured down a
condensed light upon two galleries within, which leaned into the form
of the arch itself, and were so thickly interlaced with green that
nothing else was visible except the figures which filled them,
draperied in white, side by side in shining rows,--like angels, so I
thought. Young men and boys above, in flowing robes as choristers,
overhung the maiden forms of the gallery below; and of these last,
every one wore roses on the breast, as well as glistening raiment.
These galleries of greenery were themselves overhanging a platform
covered with dark-green cloth, exquisitely fluted at the sides, and
drawn in front over three or four steps that raised it from the
flooring of the hall. A band in two divisions graced the ground floor.
I caught the sight immediately; but upon the platform itself stood a
pianoforte alone, a table covered with dark-green velvet, and about a
dozen dark-green velvet chairs. These last were all filled except one,
and its late occupant had pushed that one chair back while he stood at
the top of the table, with something glittering in his hand, and
other somethings glittering before him upon the dark-green surface. As
we entered, indeed, he was so standing, and I took in all I have
related with one glance, it was, though green, so definite.

"Look well at that gentleman who stands," whispered my guide, most
slowly; "it is he who is dispensing the prizes. He is Monsieur
Milans-André, whom you wished to see."

I am blessed with a long sight, and I took a long survey; but lest I
should prejudice the reader, my criticisms shall remain in limbo.

"When we heard the singing it was that he had just dispensed a medal;
and it is so the fellow-competitors hail the successful student. If I
mistake not, there is another advancing; but it is too far for us to
hear his name. Do you see your master at the awful table? But soft! I
think his face is not this way."

"Oh!" I thought, and I laughed in my sleeve, "he is dreaming I am safe
at home, if he dreams about me at all, which is a question." But I was
not looking after him; I took care to watch Milans-André, feeling sure
my guide would prefer not to be stared upon in a public place like
that.

The voice that called the candidates was high in key, and not
unrefined; but what best pleased me was to see one advance,--a boy,
all blushing and bowing to receive a golden medal, which Milans-André,
his very self, with his own hands, flung round the youngling's neck by
its long blue ribbon; for then the same sweet verse in semi-chorus
sounded from the loftiest gallery, the males alone repeating it for
their brother. I could not distinguish the words, but the style was
quite _alla Tedesca_.

Then another youth approached, and received more airily a silver
token, with the same blue ribbon and songful welcome. Another and
another, and at last the girls were called.

"See!" said my guide, "they have put the ladies last! That shall not
be when I take the reins of the committee. Oh, for the Cecilian
chivalry! what a taunting remembrance I will make it."

He was smiling, but I was surprised at the eagerness of his tones.

"Does it matter, sir?" said I.

"Signify? It signifies so much the more that it is a little thing, a
little token. But it shall not grow; it shall not swell. See, see!
look, Charles! what name was that?"

I had not heard it either, but the impetuosity in his tones was so
peculiar that I was constrained to look up at him. His eye was
dilated; a singular flash of light rather than flush of color glowed
upon his face, as if glory from the noonday sun had poured itself
through the impervious roof. But his gaze forbade my gaze, it was so
fixed and piercing upon something at the end of the hall.
Imperceptibly to myself I followed it. The first maiden who had
approached the chair was now turning to re-pass into her place. She
was clad, like the galleried ones, in white; but her whole aspect was
unlike theirs, for instead of the slow step and lingering blush, her
movement was a sort of flight, as if her feet were sandalled with the
wind, back again among the crowd; and as she fled, you could only
discern some strange gleam of unusual grace in a countenance drooping,
but not bashfully, and veiled with waves, not ringlets, of hair more
dark than pine-trees at midnight; also, it was impossible not to
notice the angry putting back of one gloved hand, which crushed up the
golden medal and an end of the azure ribbon, while the other was
trailing upon the ground.

"She does not like it; she is proud, I suppose!" said I; and I laughed
almost loud. "I thought you knew them all, sir?"

"No, Charles, I was never here before; but as I am to have something
to do with what they do soon, I thought I had a right to come to-day."

"A right!" said I; "who else, if you had not the right, sir? But still
I wonder how we got in so easily,--I mean I; for if you had not
brought me, I could not, I suppose, have come."

"It is this," he answered smiling, and he touched his professor's
cloak, or robe, which was now encircling his shoulders, and waved
about him pliantly. "They all wear the same on entering these walls,
at least who sit at the green table."

The choral welcome, meantime, had pealed from the lower gallery, and
another had advanced and retired from the ranks beneath. My companion
was intently gazing, not at the maiden troop, but at the deep festoons
above us. He seemed to see nothing there though, and the very position
of his hands, resting upon each other and entirely relaxed, bore
witness to the languor of his abstraction. It occurred to me how very
cool they were, both those who distributed, and those who received the
medals; I felt there was an absence of the strict romance, if I may so
name it, I had expected when I entered; for as we sat, and whence we
saw, all was ideal to the sight, and the sense was even lost in the
spiritual appreciation of an exact proportionateness to the occasion.
Yet the silence alternating with the rising and abating voices, the
harmony of the coloring and shadowing, the dim rustle of the green
festoons, the waftures of woody and blossomy fragrance, the indoor
forest feeling, so fresh and wild,--all should have stood me in stead,
perhaps, of the needless enthusiasm I should have looked for in such a
meeting, or have witnessed without surprise. I was not wise enough at
that time to define the precise degree and kind of enthusiasm I should
have required to content me, but perhaps it would be impossible even
now for any degree to content me, or for any kind not to find favor in
my eyes, if natural and spontaneously betrayed. The want I felt,
however, was just a twilight preparation of the faculties for the
scene that followed.

The last silver medal had been carried from the table, the last
white-robed nymph had sought her seat with the ribbon streaking her
drapery, when both the choral forces rose and sang together the
welcome in more exciting fulness. And then they all sat down, and a
murmur of voices and motion began to roll on all sides, as if some new
part were to be played over.

The band arose on either side, and after a short, deferential pause,
as if calling attention to something, commenced with perfect precision
Weber's "Jubel" overture.[15] It was my companion who told me its
name, whispering it into my ear; and I listened eagerly, having heard
of its author in every key of praise.

I did not much care for the effect, though it was as cool as needed to
be after those cool proceedings. I dearly wanted to ask him whether he
loved it; but it was unnecessary, for I could see it was even nothing
to him by his face. He seemed passing judgment proudly, furtively, on
all that chanced around him, and I could not but feel that he
searched all, governed all with his eye from that obscure corner.

Immediately on the conclusion of the overture several professors left
the table and clustered round the pianoforte. One opened it, and then
Milans-André approached, and waving his creamy gloves, unclothed his
hands, and stood at the front of the platform. Some boisterous shouts
arose,--they began near his station, and were imitated from the middle
benches; but there was an undemonstrative coldness even in these; they
seemed from the head, not the heart, as one might say. The artist did
not appear distressed,--indeed, he looked too classically self-reliant
to require encouragement.

He was what might be called extremely handsome. There was a largeness
about his features that would have told well in a bust,--they were
perfectly finished; also a Phidias could not have planed another
polish on the most oval nostril, a Canova could not have pumiced
unparted lips to more appropriate curve. His eyes were too far for me
to search, but I did not long to come at their full expression. He
stood elegantly, while the plaudits made their way among the muffling
leaves, and therein went to sleep; the golden flowers of the lindens
hung down withering, smitten by the terror of his presence! My
companion--to my surprise, my bewilderment even--applauded also, but,
as it were, mechanically; he stood beside me on that topmost tier
applauding, but his eyes were still fixed upon the roof. I heard his
voice among the others, and it was just at that instant that some one,
and _that_ some one in a professor's robe, a gentleman of sage
demeanor, started from one of the lower tiers and looked back suddenly
at him; as suddenly fired, flushed, lighted, all over his face, wise
and grave as it was. _He_ saw not, still rapt, still looking upwards;
but I saw and felt,--felt certain of the impressions received. A sort
of whisper crept along the tier,--a portentous thrill; one and
another, all turned, and before I could gather with my glance who had
left them, several seats were voided beneath us.

In a few minutes I heard a long and silver thundering chord. I knew it
was the reveille of the wonderful Milans-André; but so many persons
were standing and running that I could not see, and could scarcely
hear. Soon all must have heard less. As the keys continued to flash in
unmitigated splendor, a rushing noise seemed arising also from the
floor to the ceiling; it was, indeed, an earnest of my own pent-up
enthusiasm that could not be repressed, for I found myself shouting,
hurrahing beneath my breath, as all did around me. I was not mistaken;
some one opened the door by which we had entered, gustily, violently,
and drew my companion away. Before I thought of losing him, he was
gone,--I knew not whether led or carried; I knew not whether aroused
or in the midst of his high abstraction.

I pressed downwards, climbing over the benches, driving my way among
those who stood, that I might see all as well as feel; but at length I
stood upon a seat and beheld what was worth beholding, is bright to
remember; but oh, how hopeless to record! Just so might a painter
dream to pour upon his canvas an extreme effect of sunset,--those
gorgeous effusions of golden flame and blinding roses that are dashed
into dazzling mist before our hearts have gathered them to us, have
made them, in beauty so blazingly serene, our own.

The sound of the keys, so brilliant, grew dulled as by a tempest voice
in distance; not alone the hurrahs, the vivas, but the stir, the crash
of the dividing multitude. And before almost I could believe it, I
beheld moving through the cloven crowd that slight and unembarrassed
form; but he seemed alone to move as if urged by some potent
necessity, for his head was carried loftily, and there was not the
shadow of a smile upon his face.

It was evident that the people, between pressing and thronging, were
determined to conduct him to the platform; and it struck me, from his
hasty step and slightly troubled air, that he longed to reach it, for
calm to be restored. Milans-André, meantime,--will it be
believed?--continued playing, and scarcely raised his eyes as my
conductor at length mounted the steps, and seemed to my sight to
shrink among those who now stood about him. But it was hopeless to
restore the calm. I knew that from the first. He had no sooner trodden
the elevation than a burst of joyous welcome that drowned the keys,
that drenched the very ear, forced the pianist to quit his place. No
one looked at him of young or old, except those who had confronted him
at the table. They surrounded him, some with smiles and eager
questions; some with provoking gravity. The other was left alone to
stem, as it were, that tide of deafening acclaim; he slightly
compressed his lip, made a slight motion forwards; he lifted his hand
with the slight deprecation that modesty or pride might have suggested
alike,--still hopelessly. The arrears of enthusiasm demanded to be
paid with interest; the trampings, the shower-like claps, the shouts,
only deepened, widened tenfold: the multitude became a mob, and
frantic,--but with a glorious zeal! Some tore handfuls of the green
adorning the pillars, and passing it forward, it was strewn on the
steps. From the galleries hung the excited children, girls and boys,
and dividing their bouquets, rained the roses upon his head, that
floated, crimson and pink and pearly, to the green floor beneath his
feet. With a sort of delicate desperation he shook his hair from those
dropped flowers, and for one instant hid his face; the next, flung
down his hands, and smiled a flashing smile,--so that, from lip to
brow, it was as if some sunbeam fluttered in the cage of a rosy cloud,
smiling above, below, and everywhere it seemed,--ran round the group
of professors to the piano, and without seating himself, without
prelude, began a low and hymn-like melody.

Oh! that you had heard the lull, like a dream dying, dissolving from
the awakening brain,--the deep and tremendous, yet living and
breathing stillness,--that sank upon each pulse of that enthusiasm
raised and fanned by him, and by him absorbed and hidden to brood and
be at rest!

I know not which I felt the most, the passion of that almost bursting
heart of silence, as it were, rolled together into a purple bud from
its noon-day efflorescence by the power that had alone been able to
unsheathe its glories,--or that stealing, creeping People's Song, that
in few and simple chords, beneath one slender, tender pair of hands,
held bound, as it were, and condensed in one voice the voice of
myriads. For myself, I writhed with bliss, I was petrified into
desolation by delight; but I was not singular on that occasion, for
those around me seemed alone to live, to breathe, that they might
receive and retain those few precious golden notes, and learn those
glorious lineaments, so pale, so radiant with the suddenly starting
hectic, as his hands still stirred the keys to a fiercer inward
harmony than that they veiled by touch.

It was not long, that holy People's Song; I scarcely think it lasted
five minutes,--certainly not more; but the effect may be better
conceived, and the power of the player appreciated, when I say not
one note was lost: each sounded, rang almost hollow, in the intense
pervading silence.

"It is over," I thought, as he raised those slender hands, after a
rich reverberating pause on the final chord, swelling with dim
arpeggios on the harmony as into the extreme of vaulting
distance,--"it is over; and they will make that dreadful noise unless
he plays again." Never have I been so mistaken: but how could I
anticipate aught of him? For as he moved he fixed his eyes upon the
audience, so that each individual must have felt the glance within his
soul,--so seemed to feel it; for it expressed a command sheathed in a
supplication, unearthly, irresistible, that the applause should not be
renewed.

There was perfect stillness, and he turned to Milans-André and spoke.
Every one beneath the roof must have heard his words, for they were
distinct as authoritatively serene. "Will you be so good as to resume
your seat?" And as if swayed by some angel power,--such as drove the
ass of Balaam to the wall,--the imperial pianist sat down, flushed and
rather ruffled, but with a certain pomp it was trying to me to
witness, and re-commenced the concerto which had been so opportunely
interrupted. Attention seemed restored, so far as the ear of the
multitude was concerned; but every eye wandered to him who now stood
behind the player and turned the leaves of the composition under
present interpretation. _He_ seemed attentive enough,--not the
slightest motion of his features betrayed an unsettled thought. His
eyes were bent proudly, but calmly, upon the page; the rose light had
faded from his cheek as the sunset flows from heaven into
eternity,--but how did he feel? Hopeless to record, because hopeless
to imagine. Perhaps nothing; the triumph so short but bright had no
doubt become such phantasm as an unnoticeable yesterday to one whose
future is fraught with expectation.

The concerto was long and elaborately handled. I felt I really should
have admired it, have been thereby instructed, had not _he_ been
there. But there is something grotesque in talent when genius, even in
repose, is by. It is as the splendor of a festive illumination when
the sun is rising upon the city; that brightness of the night turns
pale and sick, while the celestial darkness is passing away into day.
There was an oppression upon all that I heard, for something different
had unprepared me for anything, everything, except something else like
itself. The committee were again at the table, and when I grew weary
of the second movement, I looked for my master, and found him exactly
opposite, but certainly not conscious of me. His beard was
delightfully trimmed, and his ink-black eyebrows were just as usual;
but I had never seen such an expression as that with which he regarded
the _one_. It was as if a stone had rolled from his heart, and it had
begun to beat like a child's; it was as if his youth were renewed,
like the eagle's; it was as if he were drinking, silently but deeply,
celestial knowledge from those younger heavenly eyes. "Does he love
him so well, then?" thought I. Oh that I had known it, Aronach, for
then I should have loved you, have found you out! But of course you
don't think we are worthy to partake such feeling, and I don't know
but that you are right to keep it from us. "Would that concerto never
be over?" was my next surmise,--it was about the longest process of
exhaustion to which I had ever been subjected. As for me, I yawned
until I was dreadfully ashamed; but when I bethought myself to look
round, lo! there were five or six just out of yawns as well, and a few
who had passed that stage and closed their eyes. It never struck me as
unconscionable that we should tire, when we might gaze upon the face
of him who had shown himself ready to control us all; indeed, I do
believe that had there been nothing going on, no concerto, no
Milans-André, but that he had stood there silent, just as calm and
still,--we should never have wearied the whole day long of feeding
upon the voiceless presence, the harmony unresolved. But do you not
know, oh, reader! the depression, the protracted suffering occasioned
by the contemplation of any work of art--in music, in verse, in color,
or in form--that is presented to us as model, that we coaxed to admire
and enticed to appreciate, after we have accidentally but immediately
beforehand experienced one of those ideal sensations that, whether
awakened by Nature, by Genius, or by Passion suddenly elated, claim
and condense our enthusiasm, so that we are not aware of its existence
except on a renewal of that same sensation so suddenly dashed away
from us as our sober self returns, and our world becomes again to-day,
instead of that eternal something,--new, not vague, and hidden, but
not lost?

FOOTNOTE:

[15] The Jubilee Overture, written in 1818 for the accession day of
the King of Prussia.




CHAPTER XXIX.


So absorbed was I, either in review or revery, that I felt not when
the concerto closed, and should have remained just where I was, had
not the door swung quietly behind me. I saw who beckoned me from
beyond it, and was instantly with him. He had divested himself of his
cloak, and seemed ready rather to fly than to walk, so light was his
frame, so elastic were his motions. He said, as soon as we were on the
stairs:

"I should have come for you long ago, but I thought it was of no use
until such time as I could find something you might eat; for,
Carlomein, you must be very hungry. I have caused you to forego your
dinner, and it was very hard of me; but if you will come with me, you
shall have something good and see something pretty."

"I am not hungry, sir," I of course replied; but he put up his white
finger,--

"I am, though; please to permit me to eat! Come this way."

He led me along a passage on the ground-floor of the entrance hall and
through an official-looking apartment to a lively scene indeed. This
was a room without walls, a sort of garden-chamber leading to the
grounds of the Academy, now crowded; for the concerto had concluded,
with the whole performance, and the audience had dispersed
immediately, though not by the way we came, for we had met no one.
Pillars here and there upheld the roof, which was bare to the beams,
and also dressed with garlands. Long tables were spread below, all
down the centre, and smaller ones at the sides, each covered with
beautiful white linen, and decked with fluttering ribbons and little
knots of flowers. Here piles of plates and glasses, coffee-cups and
tureens, betokening the purport of this pavilion; but they were
nothing to the baskets trimmed with fruits, the cakes and fancy bread,
the masses of sweetmeat in all imaginable preparation. The middle of
the largest table was built up with strawberries only, and a rill of
cream poured from a silver urn into china bowls at the will of a
serene young female who seemed in charge. A great many persons found
their way hither, and were crowding to the table, and the refreshing
silence was only broken by the restless jingle of spoons and crockery.
My guide smiled with a sprightly air.

"Come! we must find means to approach as well, for the strawberry
pyramid will soon not have left one stone upon another."

I made way instantly to the table, and with no small difficulty
smuggled a plate and had it filled with strawberries. I abjured the
cream, and so did he to whom I returned; but we began to wander up and
down.

"Let me recommend you," said he, "a slice of white bread; it is so
good with strawberries; otherwise you must eat some sausage, for that
fruit will never serve alone,--you might as well starve entirely, or
drink dew-water."

"I don't see any bread," I answered, laughing; "it is all eaten."

"Oh, oh!" he returned, and with the air of Puck he tripped across the
pavilion to a certain table from which the fair superintendent had
flown. The ribbons and wreaths danced in the breeze, but the white
linen was bare of a single loaf.

"I _must_ have some bread for thee, Carlomein; and I, indeed, myself
begin to feel the want unknown to angels."

Could this be the same, it struck me, who discoursed like an angel of
that high throng? So animated was he, such a sharp brightness sparkled
in his eyes.

"Somebody has run away with the loaf on purpose," he continued, with
his dancing smile; "I saw a charming loaf as I came in, but then the
strawberries put it out of my head, and lo! it is gone."

"I _will_ get some bread!" and off I darted out of the pavilion, he
after me, and all eyes upon us.

It was a beautiful scene in the air: a lovely garden, not too trim,
but diversified with mounds and tree-crowned slopes, all furnished
with alcoves, or seats and tables. Here was a hum of voices, there a
fragment of part-song scattered by a laugh, or hushed with reverent
shyness as all arose, whether sitting or lying, to uncover the head as
my companion passed. There were groups of ten or twelve, five or six,
or two and two together; many sat upon the grass, itself so dry and
mossy; and it was upon one of these parties, arranged in half Elysian,
half gypsy style, that my companion fixed his thrilling eyes.

He darted across the grass. "I have it! I see it!" and I was
immediately upon his footsteps. These were all ladies; and as they
wore no bonnets, they could not uncover, but at the same time they
were not conscious of our approach at first. They made a circle, and
had spread a linen cloth upon the fervid floor: each had a plate, and
almost every one was eating, except a young girl in the very middle
of the ring. She was dispensing, slice by slice, our missing
bread-cake. But I did not look farther, for I was lost in observing my
guide; not understanding his expression, which was troubled and
fallen, while his light tones shook the very leaves.

"Ah, the thieves, the rogues, to steal the bread from our very mouths!
Did I not know where I should find it? You cannot want it all: give us
one slice, only one little slice! for we are starving, as you do not
know, and beggars, as you cannot see, for we look like gentlemen."

I never shall forget the effect of his words upon the little group;
all were scared and scattered in a moment,--all except the young lady
who held the loaf in her lap. I do not say she stirred not, on the
contrary, it was the impulsive grace of her gesture, as she swayed her
hand to a little mound of moss by her side, just deserted, that made
me start and turn to see her, that turned me from _his_ face a moment.
"Ah! who art thou?" involuntarily sounded in my yet unaverted ear. He
spoke as if to me, but how could I reply? I was lost as he, but in far
other feelings than his,--at least I thought so, for I was surprised
at his ejaculatory wonder.

"I will cut some bread for you, sir, if you will condescend to sit,"
said a voice, which was as that of a child at its evening prayer, so
full it was of an innocent _idlesse_, not _naïveté_, but differing
therefrom as differs the lisp of infancy from the stammer of diffident
manhood.

"I should like to sit; come also, Carlomein," replied my companion;
and in defiance of all the etiquette of social Germany, which so
defiantly breathes ice between the sexes, I obeyed. So did he his own
intention; for he not only remained, but knelt on one knee, while
gazing with two suns in his eyes, he recalled the scattered company.

"Come back! come back!" he cried; "I order you!" and his silent smile
seemed beckoning as he waved his elfin hand. One strayed forward,
blushing through the hair; another disconcerted; and they all seemed
sufficiently puzzled.

The gathering completed, my conductor took up the basket and peeped
into every corner, laughed aloud, handed it about, and stole no glance
at the maiden president. I was watching her, though for a mighty and
thrilling reason, that to describe in any measure is an expectation
most like despair. Had she been his sister, the likeness between them
had been more earthly,--less appalling. I am certain it struck no one
else present, and it probably might have suggested itself to no one
anywhere besides, as I have since thought; but _me_ it clove through
heart and brain, like a two-edged sword whose temper is light instead
of steel. So I saw and felt that she partook intimately, not alone of
his nature, but of his inspiration; not only of his beauty, but his
unearthly habit. And now, how to breathe in words the mystery that was
never explained on earth! He was pure and clear, his brow like
sun-flushed snow high lifted into light,--her own dark if soft, and
toned with hues of night from the purple under-deeps of her heavy
braiding hair. His features were of mould so rare that their study
alone as models would have superseded by a new ideal the old fresh
glories of the Greek marble world,--hers were flexibly inexpressive,
all their splendor slept in uncharacteristic outline, and diffused
themselves from her perfect eyes, as they awoke on her parted lips.

His eyes, so intense and penetrative, so wise and brilliant, with all
their crystal calm and rousing fire, were as unlike hers as the sun in
the diamond to the sun upon the lonely sea. In hers the blue-green
transparence seemed to serve alone as a mirror to reflect all hues of
heaven; in his, the heaven within as often struggled with the paler
show of paradise that Nature lent him in his exile. But if I spoke of
the rest,--of the traits that pierce only when the mere veiling
loveliness is rent asunder,--I should say it must ever bid me wonder
to have discovered the divine fraternity in such genuine and artless
symbol. It was as if the same celestial fire permeated their
veins,--the same insurgent longings lifted their very feet from the
ground. The elfin hands of which I spoke were not more rare, were not
more small and subtile, than the little grasping fingers she extended
to offer him the bread, and from which his own received it. Nor was
there wanting in her smile the strange immortal sweetness that
signalized his own,--hers broke upon her parted lips like fragrance,
the fragrance that _his_ seemed to bear from the bursting buds of
thought in the sunshine of inward fancy. But what riveted the
resemblance most was the instancy of their sympathetic communion.
While those around had quietly resumed their occupation, too busy to
talk,--though certainly they might have been forgiven for being very
hungry,--_he_, no more kneeling, but rather lying than sitting, with
his godlike head turned upwards to the sky, continued to accost her,
and I heard all they said.

"I knew you again directly, you perceive, but you do not look so
naughty now as you did in the school; you were even angry, and I
cannot conceive why."

"Cannot you, sir?" she replied, without the slightest embarrassment.
"I wonder whether _you_ would like to be rewarded for serving music."

"_It_ rewards _us_, you cannot avoid its reward; but I agree with you
about the silver and the gold. We will have no more medals."

"They like them, sir, those who have toiled for them, and who would
not toil but for the promise of something to show."

"And the blue ribbons are very pretty."

"So is the blue sky, and they can neither give it us nor take it from
us; nor can they our reward."

"And that reward?" asked he.

"Is to suffer for its sake," she answered.

He lifted his eyebrows in a wondering archness. "To suffer? To suffer,
who alone enjoy, and are satisfied, and glorify happiness above all
others, and above all other things?"

"Not all suffer, only the faithful; and to suffer is not to sorrow,
and of all joy the blossom-sorrow prepares the fruit."

"And how old are you whose blossom-sorrow I certainly cannot find in
any form upon your maiden presence?"

"You smile, and seem to say, 'Thou hast not yet _lived_ the right to
speak,--purchased by experience the freedom of speech.' I am both
young and old. I believe I am younger than any just here, and I know
more than they all do."

"Was it pride," thought I, "that curled beneath those tones so flowery
soft?" for there was a lurking bitterness I had not found in _him_.

"Not younger than this one;" he took my hand and spread it across his
knee. "These fingers are to weave the azure ribbon next."

"He is coming, I know, but is not come; his name is upon the books. I
hope he will not be an out-Cecilian, because I should like to know
him, and we cannot know very well those who do not reside within the
walls."

"He is one of my very friendly ones. Will you also be very friendly
with him?"

"I always will. Be friendly now!" and she smiled upon me an instant,
very soon letting fall her eyes, in which I then detected a Spanish
droop of the lids, though, when raised, her glance dispelled the
notion, for the brightness there shone all unshorn by the inordinate
length of the lashes, and I never saw eyes so light, with lashes so
defined and dark.

"So, sir, this azure ribbon which you admire is also to be woven for
him?" she continued, as if to prolong the conversation.

"Not if symbols are to be the order of the day, for, Carlomein, your
color is not _blue_."

"No, sir; it is violet, you said."

"We say _blue violets_."

"Yes, sir," she responded quickly. "So we say the blue sky at night;
but how different at night and by day! The violet holds the blue, but
also that deeper soul by the blue alone made visible. All sounds seem
to sleep in one, when that is the violin."

"You are speaking too well; it makes me afraid you will be
disappointed," I said in my first surprise. Then, feeling I had
blundered, "I mean in me."

"That would make no difference. Music is, and is eternal. We cannot
add one moment to its eternity, nor by our inaptitude diminish the
proper glory of our art. Is it not so, sir?" she inquired of him.

Like a little child somewhat impatient over a morning lesson, he shook
his hair back and sprang upon his feet.

"I wish you to show me the garden before I go: is this where you walk?
And where is the Raphael?"

"That is placed in the conservatory, by order of Monsieur
Milans-André."

"Monsieur myself will have it moved. Why in the conservatory, I
wonder? It should be _at home_, I think."

"It does look very well there to-day, as it is hung with its peculiar
garland,--the white roses."

"Yes, the angel-roses. Oh, come, see, let us go to the angel-roses!"
and he ran down the bank of grass, and over the lawn among the people.

I was very much surprised at his gleeful impatience, not knowing a
whit to what they alluded; and I only marvelled that no one came to
fetch him, that we were suffered so long to retain him. We followed, I
not even daring to look at the girl who had so expressed herself in my
hearing, as to make me feel there were others who also _felt_; and
turning the corner of the pavilion, we came into the shadow of a
lovely walk planted and arched with lindens. It ran from a side door
of the school house to an indefinite distance. We turned into this
grove, and there again we found him.

"How green, how ravishing!" he exclaimed, as the sunsprent shadows
danced upon the ground. "Oh! that scent of scents, and sweetest of all
sweetnesses, the linden flower! You hold with me there, I think?"

"Yes, entirely; and yet it seems just sweet enough to promise, not to
be, all sweetness."

"I do not hold with you there. All that is sweet we cherish for
itself,--or I do,--and I could not be jealous of any other sweetness
when one sweetness filled up my soul."

"Yes," I thought; but I did not express it, even to myself, as it now
occurs to me,--"_that_ is the difference between your two
temperaments." And so indeed it was: _he_ aspired so high that he
could taste all sweetness in every sweetness, even here;
_she_--younger, weaker, frailer--could only lose herself between the
earth and heaven, and dared not cherish any sweetness to the utmost,
while here unsafely wandering.

"And this conservatory,--how do you use it?"

"We do not use it generally; we may walk round it: but on state
occasions refreshments are served there to our professors and their
friends. I daresay it will be so to-day."

"There will be people in there, you mean? In that case I think I shall
remain, and sun myself on the outside. You, Carlomein, shall go in and
look at the picture for me."

"Is it a picture, sir? But I cannot see it for you; I should be
afraid. I wish you would come in, sir!"

"Ah, I know why! You are frightened lest Aronach should pounce upon
you,--is it not?"

I laughed. "A little, sir."

"Well, in that case I _will_ come in. It does look inviting,--pretty
room!"

We stopped at the conservatory door. It was rather large, and very
long; a table down the centre was dressed with flowers, and
overflowing dishes decked the board. There were no seats, but a narrow
walk ran round, and over this the foreign plants were grouped richly,
and with excelling taste. The roof was not curtained with vine-leaves,
as in England, but it was covered with the immense leaves and
ivory-yellow blossoms of the magnolia grandiflora, which made the
small arched space appear expanded to immensity by the largeness of
its type, and gave to all the exotics an air of home.

At the end of the vista, some thirty feet in length, there were
several persons all turned from us; and as we crept along, one by one,
until we reached that end, the odors of jasmine and tuberose were
heavy upon every breath. I felt as if I must faint until we attained
that point where a cool air entered; refreshing, though itself just
out of the hottest sunshine I had almost ever felt. This breeze came
through arched doors on either hand half open and met in two embracing
currents where the picture hung. All were looking at the picture, and
I instantly refrained from criticism. It was hung by invisible cords
to the framework of the conservatory, and thence depended. About it
and around it clustered the deep purple bells and exquisite tendrils
and leaves of the maurandia, while the scarlet passion-flower met it
above and mingled its mystic splendors. Other strange glories, but for
me nameless, pressing underneath, shed their glowing smiles from
fretted urns or vases; but around the frame, and so close to the
picture as to hide its other frame entirely, lay the cool white roses,
in that dazzling noon so seeming, and amidst those burning colors. The
picture itself was divine as painting can render its earthly ideal, so
strictly significant of the set rules of beauty. All know the "Saint
Cecilia" of Raphael d'Urbino; this was one of the oldest copies, and
was the greatest treasure of the committee, having been purchased for
an extravagant sum by the president from the funds of the
foundation,--a proceeding I did not clearly comprehend, but was too
ignorant to tamper with. It was the young lady who enlightened me as I
stood by her side. Of those who stood there I concluded the most part
had already refreshed themselves; they held plates or glasses, and in
a few moments first one and then another recognized our companion, and
that with a reverential impressiveness it charmed me to behold. It
may have been the result of his exquisitely bright and simple manner,
for he had wholly put aside the awful serene reserve that had
controlled the crowd in public. Milans-André happened to be there; I
beheld him now, and also saw that, taking hold upon that arm I should
not have presumed to touch, he drew on our guide as if away from us.
But this one stayed, and resting his hand upon the table, inquired
with politeness for a court,--

"Where is your wife? Is she here to-day? I want to show her to a young
gentleman."

Milans-André looked down upon him, for he was quite a head taller,
though not tall himself. "She is here, but not in here. I left her
with the Baroness Silberung. Come and see her in-doors. She will be
highly flattered."

"No, I am not coming; I have two children to take charge of. Where is
Professor Aronach?"

"In the committee-room, and in a great rage,--with you, too, it
appears, Chevalier."

"With me, is it? I am so glad!"

He stepped back to us.

"I do not believe that any one can make him so angry as I can! It is
charming, Carlomein!"

Oh, that name, that dear investment! How often it thrilled me and
troubled me with delight that day.

"I suppose, sir, I have something to do with it."

Before he could reply, Milans-André had turned back, and with scornful
complacency awaited him near a glass dish of ices dressed with
ice-plant. He looked revengeful, too, as he helped himself; and on our
coming up, he said, "Do you eat nothing, Chevalier?" while filling a
plate with the pink-frozen strawberry.

"Oh! I could eat it, if I would; for who could resist that
rose-colored snow? But I have no time to eat; I must go find Aronach,
for I dreamed I should find him here."

"My dear Chevalier, drink then with me!"

"In Rhine wine? Oh, yes, mein Herr Professor! and let us drink to all
other professors and chevaliers in ourselves represented."

The delicately caustic tones in which he spoke were, as it were,
sheathed by the unimpeachable grace of his demeanor as he snatched
first one, and then another, and the third, of three tall glasses, and
filling them from the tapering bottle to the brim, presented one to
the lovely girl who had screened herself behind me, one to myself, and
the third to himself; all the while regarding Milans-André, who was
preparing his own, with a mirthful expression, still one of the very
sweetest that could allure the gaze.

When André looked up, he turned a curious paleness, and seemed almost
stoned with surprise. I could neither understand the one nor the
other; but after our pledge, which we two heartily responded to, my
maiden companion gave me a singular beckoning nod, which the instant
reminded me of Miss Lawrence, and at the same time moved and stood
four or five steps away. I followed to the pomegranate plant.

"Come even closer," she whispered; "for I daresay you are curious
about those two."

If she had not been, as she was, most unusually beautiful to behold, I
should dearly have grudged her that expression,--"those two;" but she
constrained me by her sea-blue eyes to attentive silence.

"You see what a power has the greater one over the other. I have never
seen _him_ before, but my brother has told me about him; besides,
here he is worshipped, and no wonder. The Cecilia School was founded
by one Gratianos, a _Bachist_, about forty years ago, but not to
succeed all at once, of course; the foundations were too poor, and the
intentions too sublime. Louis Spohr's works brought us first into
notice, because our students distinguished themselves at a certain
festival four years ago. The founder died about that time, and had not
Milans-André put himself in the way to be elected president, we should
have gone to nothing; but he was rich, and wanted to be richer, so he
made of us a speculation, and his name was sufficient to fill the
classes from all parts of Europe. But we should have worse than gone
to nothing soon, for we were slowly crystallizing into the same order
as certain other musical orders that shall not be named, for perhaps
you would not know what I mean by quoting them."

"I could, if you would explain to me, and I suppose you mean the music
that is studied is not so select as it should be."

"That is quite enough to the purpose," she proceeded, with quite an
adult fluency. "About three months ago we gave a great concert. The
proceeds were for enlarging the premises, and we had a great
crowd,--not in the room we used to-day, which is new, but in the large
room we shall now keep for rehearsals. After the concert, which André
conducted, and at which all the prodigies assisted, the conductor read
us a letter. It was from one we had all heard of, and whom many of us
loved secretly, and dared not openly, for reasons sad and many,--from
the 'Young Composer,' as André satirically chose to call him, the
Chevalier Seraphael."

"Oh!" I cried, "is that his name? What a wonderful name! It is like
an angel to be called Seraphael."

"Hush! none of that now, because I shall not be able, perhaps, to tell
you what I want you to know before you come here. Seraphael had just
refused the post of Imperial pianist, which had been pressed upon him
very earnestly; and the reason he gave for refusing it certainly
stands alone in the annals of artistic policy,--that there was only
one composer living to whom the office of Imperial pianist should be
confided, and by whom it must be assumed,--Milans-André himself. Then
it went on to insinuate that by exclusive exchange only could such an
arrangement be effected; in short, that Milans-André, who must not go
out of Austria, should be prevailed upon, in that case, to resign the
humble position that detained him here, to the young composer himself.
Now Milans-André did resign, as you may suppose; but, they say, not
without a douceur, and we presented him with a gold beaker engraved
with his own arms, when he retired,--that was not the douceur, mind;
he had a benefit."

"That means a concert, with all the money it brought for himself. But
why did you not see the Chevalier until to-day?"

"Some of ours did,--the band and the chorus; but I do not belong to
either. You have no idea what it is to serve music under Milans-André;
and when he came to-day, we all knew what it meant, who were wishing
for a new life. It was a sort of electric snapping of our chains when
he played to-day."

"With that Volkslied?"

"Yes," she responded, with tremulous agitation, "with that Volkslied.
Who shall say he does not know all hearts?"

"But it is not a Burschen song,[16] nor like one; it is like nothing
else."

"No, thank God! a song for the women as well as the men. You never
heard such tones, nor I. Well it was that we could put words to them,
everybody there."

"And yet it was a song without words," said a voice so gentle that it
stole upon my imagination like a sigh.

"Oh, sir, is it you?"

I started, for he was so near to us I was afraid he might have been
vexed by hearing. But she was unchanged, unruffled as a flower of the
conservatory by the wind without. She looked at him full, and he
smiled into her very eyes.

"I only heard your very last words. Do not be afraid, for I knew you
were talking secrets, and that is a play I never stop. But, Carlomein,
when you have played your play, I must carry you to your master, whom
I might call _ours_, and beg his pardon for all my iniquities."

"Oh, sir! as if you needed," I said; but the young lady answered,--

"_I_ shall retreat, then, sir,--and indeed this is not my place."

She courtesied lowly as to a monarch, but without a shadow of
timidity, or so much as the flutter of one rose-leaf, and passed out
among the flowers, he looking after her strangely, wistfully.

"Is not that a Cecilia, Carlomein?"

"If you think so, sir."

"You do not think it? You ought to know as well as I. As she is gone,
let us go."

And lightly as she fled, he turned back to follow her. But we had lost
her when we came into the garden. As he passed along, however, also
among the flowers, he touched first one and then another of the
delicate plants abstractedly, until at length he pulled off one
blossom of an eastern jasmine,--a beautiful specimen, white as his own
forehead, and of perfume sweetest next his breath.

"Oh!" said he gayly, "I have bereaved the soft sisterhood; but," he
added earnestly, as he held the pale blossom between his fairest
fingers, "I wonder whether they are unhappy so far from home. I wonder
whether they _know_ they are away!"

"I should think not, sir, or they would not blossom so beautifully."

"That is nothing, and no reason, O Carlomein! for I have seen such a
beautiful soul that was away from home, and it was very homesick; yet
it was so fair, so very fair, that it would put out the eye of this
little flower."

I could not help saying, or quickly murmuring rather, "It must be your
soul then, sir."

"Is it mine to thee? It is to me another; but that does not spoil thy
pretty compliment."

I never heard tones so sweet, so infantine. But we had reached the
door of the glass chamber, and I then observed that he was gazing
anxiously--certainly with inquiry--at the sky. At that moment it first
struck me that since our entrance beneath the shadowy greenness the
sun had gone in. Simultaneously a shade, as from a springing cloud,
had fallen upon that brilliant countenance. We stepped out into the
linden grove, and then it came upon me, indeed, that the heavens were
dulled, and a leaden languor had seized upon the fresh young foliage.
Both leaves and yellow blossom hung wearily in the gloom, and I felt
the intense lull that precedes an electric shower. I looked at him. He
was entirely pale, and the soft lids of his eyes had dropped,--their
lights had gone in like the sun. His lips seemed to flutter, and he
spoke with apprehensive agitation.

"I think it will rain, but we cannot stay in the conservatory."

"Sir, it will be dry there," I ventured.

"No, but if it should thunder."

At the very instant the western cloudland, as it were, shook with a
quivering flash, though very far off; for the thunder was, indeed, but
a mutter several minutes afterwards. But he seemed stricken into
stillness, and moved not from the trees at the entrance of the avenue.

"Oh! sir," I cried,--I could not help it, I was in such dread for
him,--"do not stand under the trees. It is a very little way to the
house, and we can run."

"Run, then," he answered sweetly. "But I cannot; I never could stir in
a storm."

"Pray, sir, oh pray, come!" the big drops were beginning to prick the
leafy calm. "And you will take cold too, sir. Oh, come!"

But he seemed as if he could scarcely breathe. He pressed his hands on
his brow and hid his eyes. I thought he was going to faint; and under
a vague impression of fetching assistance, I rushed down the avenue.

FOOTNOTE:

[16] The Volkslied is a people's song; the Burschenlied a student's
song.




CHAPTER XXX.


I can never express my satisfaction when, two or three trees from the
end, I met the magic maiden herself, all hooded, and carrying an
immense umbrella.

"Where is this Chevalier of ours?" she asked me, with eagerness. "You
surely have not left him alone in the rain?"

"I was coming for you," I cried; for such was, in fact, the case. But
she noticed not my reply, and sped fleetly beneath the now weeping
trees. I stood still, the rain streaming upon my head, and the dim
thunder every now and then bursting and dying mournfully, yet in the
distance, when I heard them both behind me. How astonished was I! I
turned and joined them. They were talking very fast,--the strange girl
having her very eyes fixed on the threatening sky, at which she
laughed. He was not smiling, but seemed borne along by some impulse he
could not resist, and was even unconscious of; he held the umbrella
above them both, and she cried to me to come also beneath the canopy.
We had only one clap as we crossed the lawn,--now reeking and
deserted; but a whole levee was in the refreshment pavilion waiting
for the monarch,--so many professors robed, so many Cecilians with
their badges, that I was ready to shrink into a nonentity, instead of
feeling myself by my late privilege superior to all. Every person
appeared to turn as we made our way. But for all the clamor I heard
him whisper, "You have done with me what no one ever did yet; and oh!
I do thank you for being so kind to the foolish child. But come with
me, that I may thank you elsewhere."

"I would rather stay, sir. Here is my place, and I went out of my
place to do you that little service of which it is out of the question
to speak."

"You must not be proud. Is it too proud to be thanked, then?"

With the gentlest grace, he held out to her the single jasmine
blossom. "See, no tear has dropped upon it. Will you take its last
sigh?"

She drew it down into her hand, and, almost as airily as he moved,
glided in among the crowd, which soon divided us from her.

Seraphael himself sighed so very softly that none could have _heard_
it; but I saw it part his lips and heave his breast.

"She does not care for me, you see," he said, in a sweet, half pettish
manner, as we left the pavilion.

"Oh! sir, because she does not come with you? That is the very reason,
because she cares so much."

"How do you make that out?"

"I remember the day I brought you that water, sir, how I was afraid to
stay, although I would have given everything to stay and look at your
face; and I ran away so fast because of that."

"Oh, Carlomein, hush! or you must make me vain. I wonder very much why
you do like me; but, pray, let it be so."

"Like you!" I exclaimed, as we moved along the corridor, "you are
_all_ music,--you must be; for I knew it before I had heard you play."

"They do say so. I wonder whether it is true," said he, laughing a
bright, sudden laugh, as brightly sounding as his smile was bright to
gaze on. "We shall all know some time, I suppose. Now, Carlomein, what
am I to say to this master of yours about you? For here we are at the
door, and there is he inside."

"Pray, sir, say what you like, and nothing if you like, for I don't
care whether he storms or not."

"'Storms' is a very fine word; but, like our thunder, I expect it will
go off very quietly. How kind it was not to thunder and lighten much,
and to leave off so soon!"

"Oh! I am so glad. I hate thunder and lightning."

"Do you? and yet you ran for me. Thank you for another little lesson."

He turned and bowed to me, not mockingly, but with a sweet, grave
humor. He opened the door at that moment, and I went in behind him.
The very first person I saw was Aronach, sitting, as if he never
intended to move again, in a great wooden chair, writing in a long
book, while other attentive worthies looked over his shoulder. His
eyes were down, and my companion crept round the room next the wall as
noiselessly as a walking shadow. Then behind the chair, and putting up
his finger to those around, he embraced with one arm the chair's
stubborn back, and stretched the other forwards, spreading his slender
hand out wide into the shape of some pink, clear fan-shell, so as to
intercept the view Aronach had of his long book and that unknown
writing.

"Der Teufel!" growled Aronach, "dost thou suppose I don't know thy
hand among a thousand? But thy pranks won't disturb me any more now
than they did of old. Take it off, then, and thyself too."

"Oh! I daresay; but I won't go. I want to show thee a sight, Father
Aronach."

He then drew _my_ arm forwards, and held my hand by the wrist, as by
a handle, just under Aronach's nose. He looked indeed now; and so
sharply, snappishly, that I thought he would have bitten my fingers,
and felt very nervous. Seraphael broke into one of his laughter
chimes, but still dangled my member; and when Aronach really saw my
phiz, he no longer snapped nor roused up grandly, but sank back
impotent in that enormous chair. He winked indeed furiously, but his
eyes did not flash, so I grew still in my own mind, and thought to
speak to him first. I said, somehow, and never thinking a creature was
by, except that companion of mine,--

"Dear master, I would not have come without your leave. But you know
very well I could not refuse this gentleman, because he is a friend of
yours, and you said yourself we must all obey him."

"Whippersnapper and dandiprat! I never said such words to _thee_. I
regard him too much to inform such as thou with obedience. Thou hast,
I can see very clearly, made away with all his spirit by thy
frivolities, and I especially commend thee for dragging such as he up
the hill in this heat. There are no such things as coaches in the Kell
Platz, I suppose, or have the horses taken a holiday too?"

"Stop, stop, Aronach! for though I am a little boy," said the other,
"I am bigger than he, and I brought him, not he me; and I dragged him
thither too, for I don't like your coaches. And it is I who ought to
beg pardon for taking him from work he likes so much better than any
play, as he told me. But I did want to walk with him, that I might ask
him about my English friends, with whom he is better acquainted than I
am. He does know them, oh, so well! and had so many interesting
anecdotes!"

At the utterance of this small white fib I was almost in fits; but he
still went on,--

"I know I have done very wrong, and I was an idle boy to tempt him;
but you yourself could not help playing truant to-day. And, dearest
master,"--here his sweet, sweet voice was retrieved from the airy
gayety,--"do let me come back with you to-day, and have a
story-telling. You have not told me a story for a sad long time."

"If you come back, Chevalier, and if we are to get back before
bed-time, I would have you go along and rest, if you can, until I
shall be free; for I shall never empty my hands while you are by."

Aronach did not say "thou" here, I noticed, and his voice was even
courteous, though he still preserved his stateliness. Like a boy,
indeed, Seraphael laid hold of my arm and pulled me from the room
again. I cannot express the manly indignation of the worthies we left
in there at such sportiveness. They all stood firm, and in truth they
_were_ all older, both in body and soul, than we. But no sooner were
we outside than he began to laugh, and he laughed so that he had to
lean against the wall. I laughed too; it was a most contagious spell.

"Now, Carl," he said, "very Carlomein! we will make a tour of
discovery. I declare I don't know where I am, and am afraid to find
myself in the young ladies' bedrooms. But I want to see how things are
carried on here."

We turned this way and that way, he running down all the passages and
trying the very doors; but these were all locked.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, vivaciously, "they are, I suppose, too fine;" and
then we explored farther. One end of the corridor was screened by a
large oaken door from another range of rooms, and not without
difficulty we effected an entrance, for the key, although in the lock,
was rusty, and no joke to turn. Here, again, were doors, right and
left; here also all was hidden under lock and key that they might be
supposed to contain; but we did at last discover a curious hole at the
end, which we did not take for a room until we came inside,--having
opened the door, which was latched, and not especially convenient.
However, before we advanced I had ventured, "Sir, perhaps some one is
in there, as it is not fastened up."

"I shall not kill them, I suppose," he replied, with a curious
eagerness. Then with the old sweetness, "You are very right, I will
knock; but I know it will be knocking to nobody."

He had then touched the panel with his delicate knuckles; no voice had
answered, and with a mirthful look he lifted the latch and we both
entered. It was a sight that surprised me; for a most desolate
prison-cell could not have been darker. The window ought not to be so
named; for it let in no light, only shade, through its lack-lustrous
green glass. There was no furniture at all, except a very narrow
bed,--looking harder than Lenhart Davy's, but wearing none of that air
of his. There was a closet, as I managed to discover in a niche, but
no chest, no stove; in fact, there was nothing suggestive at all,
except one solitary picture, and that hung above the bed and looked
down into it, as it were, to protect and bless. I felt I know not how
when I saw it then and there; for it was--what picture do you think? A
copy of the very musical cherub I had met with upon Aronach's
wreath-hung walls. It was fresher, newer, in this instance, but it had
no gold or carven frame; it was bound at its edge with fair blue
ribbon only, beautifully stitched, and suspended by it too. Above the
graceful tie was twisted one long branch of lately-gathered linden
blossom, which looked itself sufficient to give an air of heaven to
the close little cell; it was even as flowers upon a tomb,--those
sighs and smiles of immortality where the mortal has passed forever!

"Oh, sir!" I said, and I turned to him,--for I knew his eyes were
attracted thither,--"oh, sir! do you know whose portrait that is? For
my master has it, and I never dared to ask him; and the others do not
know."

"It is a picture of the little boy who played truant and tempted
another little boy to play truant too."

And then, as he replied, I wondered I had not thought of such a
possibility; for looking from one to the other, I could not now but
trace a certain definite resemblance between _those_ floating baby
ringlets and the profuse dark curls wherein the elder's strength
almost seemed to hide,--so small and infinitely spiritual was he in
his incomparable organization.

"Now, sir, do come and rest a little while before we go."

He was standing abstractedly by that narrow bed, and looked as sad, as
troubled, as in the impending thunder-cloud; but he rallied just as
suddenly.

"Yes, yes; we had better go, or she might come."

I could not reply, for this singular prescience daunted me,--how could
he tell it was _her_ very room? But when we came into the corridor, I
beheld, by the noonday brightness, which was not banished thence, that
there was a kind of moist light in his eyes, not tears, but as the
tearful glimmer of some blue distance when rain is falling upon those
hills.

We threaded our way downstairs again,--for he seemed quite unwilling
to explore farther,--and I wondered where he would lead me next, when
we met Milans-André in the hall. The Chevalier blushed even as an
angry virgin on beholding him, but still met him cordially as before.

"Where are you staying, Chevalier? At the Fürstin Haus?"

"I am not staying here at all. I am going back to Lorbeerstadt to
sleep, and to-morrow to Altenweg, and then to many places for many
days."

"Oh! I thought you would have supped with me, and I could have a
little initiated you. But if you are really returning to Lorbeerstadt,
pray use my carriage, which is waiting in the yard."

"You are only too amiable, my dear André. We shall use it with the
greatest pleasure."

Oh! how black did André look when Seraphael laid that small, delicate
stress upon the "we;" for I knew the invitation intended his
colleague, and included no one else. But the other evidently took it
all for granted; and again thanking him with exquisite gayety, ran out
into the court-yard, and cried to me to come and see the carriage.

"I have a little coach myself," he said to me and also to André, who
was lounging behind along with us; "but it is a toy compared with
yours, and I wonder I did not put it into my pocket, it is so
small,--only large enough for thee and me, Carlomein."

"Why, Seraphael, you are dreaming. There are no such equipages in all
Vienna as your father's and mother's."

"They are not mine, you see; and if I drove such, I should look like a
sparrow in a hencoop. Oh, Carlomein, what quantities of sparrows there
are in London! Do they live upon the smuts?"

At this instant the carriage, whose driver André had beckoned to draw
up, approached; and then we both ran to fetch Aronach, who came out
very grumbling, for the entry in the long book was scarcely dry; and
he saluted nobody, but marched after us like a person suddenly wound
up, putting himself heavily into the carriage, which he did not notice
in the least. It was an open carriage, Paris-built (as I now know),
and so luxuriously lined as not to be very fit for an expedition in
any but halcyon weather. As for Seraphael, he flung himself upon the
seat as a cowslip ball upon the grass, and scarcely shook the light
springs; and as I followed him, he made a profound bow to the owner of
the equipage, who, disconsolately enough, still stood within the
porch.

"Now, I do enjoy this, Carlomein! I cannot help loving to be saucy to
André,--good, excellent, and wonderful as he is."

I looked to find whether he was in earnest. But I could not tell, for
his eyes were grave, and the lips at rest. But Aronach gave a growl,
though mildly,--as the lion might growl in the day when a little child
shall lead him.

"You have not conquered that weakness yet, and, I prophesy, never
will."

"What weakness, master?" But he faltered, even as a little child.

"To excuse fools and fondle slaves."

"Oh, my master, do not scold me!" and he covered his eyes with his
little blue-veined hands. "It is so sad to be a fool or a slave that
we should do all for such we can do, especially if we are not so
ourselves. I think myself right there."

His pleading tone here modulated into the still authority I had
noticed once or twice, and Aronach gave a smile in reply, which was
the motion of the raptured look I had noticed during the
improvisation.

"Thou teachest yet, then, out of thy vocation. But thou art no more
than thou ever hast been,--too much for thy old master. And as wrens
fly faster and creep stealthier than owls, so art thou already whole
heavens beyond me."

But with tender scornfulness, Seraphael put out his hand in
deprecation, and throwing back his hair, buried his head in the
cushion of the carriage and shut his eyes. Nor did he again open them
until we entered our little town.

I need scarcely say I watched him; and often, as in a glassy mirror, I
see that face again upturned to the light,--too beautiful to require
any shadow, or to seek it,--see again the dazzling day draw forth its
lustrous symmetry, while ever the soft wind tried to lift those deep
locks from the lucid temples, but tried in vain; what I am unable to
picture to myself in so recalling being the ever restless smile that
played and fainted over the lips, while the closed eyes were feeding
upon the splendors of the Secret. I shall never forget either, though,
how they opened; and he came, as it were, to his childlike self again
as the light carriage--light indeed for Germany--dashed round the Kell
Platz, where its ponderous contemporaneous contradictions were ranged,
and took the fountain square in an unwonted sweep. Then he sat forward
and watched with the greatest eagerness, and he sprang out almost
before we stopped.

"I think Carl and I could save you these stairs, master mine," he
exclaimed. "Let us carry you up between us!"

But what do you think was the reply? Seraphael had spoken in his
gleeful voice. But Aronach wore his gravest frown as he turned and
pounced suddenly upon the other,--whipping him up in his arms, and
hoisting him to his shoulder, then speeding up the staircase with his
guest as if the weight were no greater than a flower or a bird! I
could not stir some moments from astonishment and alarm, for I had
instantaneous impressions of Seraphael flying over the balusters; but
presently, when his laugh came ringing down,--and I realized it to be
the laugh of one almost beside himself with fun,--I flew after them,
and found them on the dark landing at the foot of our own flight.
Seraphael was now upon his feet, and I quite appreciated the delicate
policy of the old head here. He said in a moment, when his breath was
steady,--

"Now, if they offer to chair thee again at the Quartzmayne Festival,
and thou turnest giddy-pate, send for me!"

"I certainly will, if they offer such an honor; but once is quite
enough, and they will not do it again."

"Why not?"

"Because I fell into the river, and was picked up by a fisherman; and
desiring to know my character after I was dead, I made him cover me
with his nets and row me down to Carstein, quite three miles. There I
supped with him, and slept too, and the next morning heard that I was
drowned."

"Oh! one knows that history, which found its way into a certain paper
among the lies, and was published in illustration of the
eccentricities of genius."

Aronach said this very cross,--I wondered whether it was with the
Press, or his pupil; but if it were with the latter, _he_ only enjoyed
it the more.

Then Aronach bade me conduct his guest into the organ-room, while he
himself put a period to those howlings of the immured ones which yet
conscientiously asserted themselves. We waited a few moments upstairs,
and then Aronach carried off the Chevalier to his own room,--a sacred
region I had never approached, and which I could only suppose to
exist. I then rushed to mine, and was so long in collecting my senses
that Starwood came to bid me to supper. I did not detain him then,
though I had so much to say; but I observed that he had his Sunday
coat on,--a little blue frock, braided; and I remembered that I ought
to have assumed my own. Still, my wardrobe was in such perfect order
(thanks to Clo) that my own week coat was more respectable than many
other boys' Sunday ones; and though I have the instinct of personal
cleanliness very strong, I cannot say I like to look smart.

When I reached our parlor, I was quite dazzled. There was a sumptuous
banquet, as I took it, arranged upon a cloth, the fineness and
whiteness of which so far transcended our daily style that I
immediately apprehended it had proceeded from the secret hoards in
that wonderful closet of Aronach's. The tall glasses were interspersed
with silver flagons, and the usual garnishings varied by all kinds of
fruits and flowers, which appeared to have sprung from a magic touch
or two of that novel magic presence. For the rest, there were
delicious milk porridge on our accounts, and honey and butter, and I
noticed those long-necked bottles, one like which Santonio had
emptied, and which I had never seen upon that table since; for Aronach
was very frugal, and taught us to be so. I was so from taste and by
habit, but Iskar would have liked to gorge himself with dainties, I
used to think. When I saw this last seated at the table I was highly
indignant, for he had set his stool by Seraphael's chair. He had
fished from his marine store of clothes a crumpled white-silk
waistcoat, over which he had invested himself with a tarnished silver
watch-chain. But I would not, if I could, recall his audacious manner
of gazing over everything upon the table and everybody in the room,
with those legs of his stretched out for any one to stumble over, or
rather on purpose to make me stumble. I knew this very well, and
avoided him by placing my stool on the opposite edge of the board,
where I could still look into the eyes I loved if I raised my own.

This insignificant episode will prove that Iskar had not grown in my
good graces, nor had I acquainted myself better with him than on the
first night of my arrival. I knew him not, but I knew _of_ him, for
every voice in the house was against him; and he gave promise of no
small power upon his instrument, together with small promise of
musical or mental excellence, as all he did was correct to caricature
and inimitably mechanical. Vain as he was of his playing, his vanity
had small scope on that score under that quiet roof shadow, so it
spent itself upon his person, which was certainly elegant, if vulgar.
I am not clear but that one of these personal attractions always
infers the other. But why I mention Iskar is that I may be permitted
to recall the expressions with which our master's guest regarded him.
It was a grieved, yet curious glance, with that child-like scrutiny of
what is not true all abashing to the false, _unless_ the false has
lost all child-likeness. Iskar must, I suppose, have lost it, for he
was not the least abashed, and was really going to begin upon his
porridge before we had all sat down, if Aronach had not awfully, but
serenely, rebuked him. Little Starwood, by my side, looked as fair and
as pretty as ever, rather more shy than usual. Seraphael, now seated,
looked round with that exquisitely sweet politeness I have never met
with but in him, and asked us each whether we would eat some honey,
for he had the honey-pot before him. I had some, of course, for the
pleasure of being helped by him, and he dropped it into my milk in a
gold flowing stream, smiling as he did so. It was so we always ate
honey at Aronach's, and it is so I eat it to this day. Little Star put
out his bowl too. Oh! those great heavy wooden bowls! it was just too
much for him, and he let it slip. Aronach was rousing to thunder upon
him, and I felt as if the ceiling were coming down (for I knew he was
angry on account of that guest of his), when we heard that voice in
its clear authority,--"Dear Aronach, do nothing! the milk is not
spoiled." And turning all of us together, we saw that he had caught
the bowl on his outstretched hands, and that not a drop had fallen. I
mention it as illustrative of that miraculous organization in which
intent and action were simultaneous, the motions of whose will it
seemed impossible to retard or anticipate. Even Iskar looked
astonished at this feat; but he had not long to wonder, for Aronach
sternly commended us to great haste in the disposal of our supper.

I needed not urging, for it was natural to feel that the master and
his master must wish to be alone,--indeed, I should have been thankful
to escape eating, though I was very hungry, that I might not be in the
way; but directly I took pains to do away with what I had before me, I
was forbidden by Aronach to "bolt."

I lay awake many hours in a vague excitement of imaginary organ sounds
welling up to heaven from heaven's under-springs. I languished in a
romantic vision of that face, surrounded with cloud-angels, itself
their out-shining light. I waited to hear his footsteps upon the
stairs when he should at length depart; but so soft was that departing
motion that even I, listening with my whole existence, heard it not,
nor heard anything to remind my heart-silence that he had come and
gone.




CHAPTER XXXI.


I think I can relate nothing else of that softest month of summer, nor
of sultry June. It was not until the last week I was to change my
quarters; but long as it seemed in coming, it came when I was hardly
prepared for the transfer. Aronach returned to his stricter self again
after that supper, but I felt certain he had heard a great deal after
we had left the table, as an expression of softer character forsook
not his eyes and smile for many days. I could not discover whether
anything had passed concerning Starwood, who remained my chief
anxiety, as I felt if I left him there alone, he would not get on at
all. Iskar and I preserved our mutual distance, though I would fain
have been more often with him, for I wanted to make him out. He
practised harder than ever, and hardly took time to eat and drink, and
only on Sundays a great while to dress. He was always very jauntily
put together when we set out to church, and looked like a French
manikin. But for his upper lip and the shallow width of his forehead,
I thought him very handsome, while, yet so young, he was so; but his
charm consisted for me in his being unapproachable, and as I thought,
mysterious.

We saw about as little of each other as it was possible to see, living
in the same house and dining in the same room; but we never talked at
meals, we had no time.

It is but fair to allow myself an allusion to my violin, as it was
becoming a very essential feature in my history. With eight hours'
practice a day I had made some solid progress; but it did not convict
me of itself yet, as I was not allowed to play, only to acquaint
myself with the anatomy of special compositions, as exercises in
theory. Iskar played so easily, and gave such an air of playing to
practice, that it never occurred to me I was getting on, though it was
so, as I found in time. At this era I hated the violin, just as
pianoforte students hate the pianoforte during the period of
apprenticeship to mechanism. I hated the sound that saluted me
morning, noon, and night; I shrank from it ever unaccustomed, for the
penetralia of my brain could never be rendered less susceptible by
piercing and searching its recesses. I believe my musical perception
was as sensitive as ever, all through this epidemic dislike, but I
felt myself personally very musically indisposed. I could completely
dissociate my ideal impression of that I loved from my absolute
experience of what I served. I was patient, because waiting; content,
because faithful; and I pleased myself albeit with reflecting that my
violin--my own property, my very own--had a very different soul from
that thing I handled and tortured every day, from which the soul had
long since fled. For all the creators of musical forms have not power
to place in them the soul that lives for ages, and a little wear and
tear separates the soul from the body. As for my Amati, I knew its
race so pure that I feared for it no premature decay. In its dark box
I hoped it was at least not unhappy, but I dearly longed for a sight
of it, and had I dared, I would have crept into the closet, but that
whenever it was unlocked I was locked up. The days flew, though they
seemed to me so long, as ever in summer; and I felt how ravishing
must the summer be without the town. I wearied after it; and although
the features of German scenery are quite without a certain bloom I
have only found in England, they have some mystic beauty of their own
unspeakably more touching; and as I lived then, all life was a
fairy-tale book, with half the leaves uncut. I was ever dreaming, but
healthfully,--the dreams forgotten as soon as dreamed; so it chanced
that I can tell you nothing of all I learned or felt, except what was
tangibly and wakingly presented to myself. I remember, however, more
than distinctly all that happened the last evening I passed in that
secluded house, to my sojourn in which I owe all the benisons bestowed
upon my after artist life. We had supped at our usual hour, but when I
arose and advanced to salute Aronach as usual, and sighed to see how
bright the sun was still upon everything without and within, he
whispered in my ear,--an attention he had never before paid me,--"Stay
up by me until the other two are off; for I wish to speak to thee and
to give thee some advice."

Iskar saw him whisper, and looked very black because he could not
hear; but Aronach waved him out, and bade me shut the door upon him
and Starwood. I trembled then, for I was not used to be along with him
_tête-à-tête_; we usually had a third party present in the company of
Marpurg or Albrechtsberger.[17] He went into the closet first, and
rummaged a few minutes, and then returning, appeared laden with a
bottle of wine and my long hid fiddle-case. Oh, how I flew to relieve
him of it! But he bade me again sit down, while he went back into the
closet and rummaged again; this time for a couple of glasses and two
or three curious jars, rich china, and of a beautiful form. He
uncorked the bottle and poured me, as I expected, a glass of wine.

It was not the wine that agitated me, but the rarity of the attention,
so much so that I choked instead of wishing him his health, as I ought
to have done. But he was quite unmoved at my excitation, and leaned
back to pour glass after glass down his own throat. I was so unused to
wine that the sip I took exhilarated me, though it was the slightest
wine one can imbibe for such purpose. And then he uncovered the odd
gay jars, and helped me profusely to the exquisite preserves they
contained. They were so luscious and delicate that they reminded me of
Eden fruits; and almost before my wonder had shaped itself into form,
certainly before it could have betrayed itself in my countenance,
Aronach began to speak,--

"They pique thee, no doubt, and not only thy palate, for thou wast
ever curious. They come from him of whom thou hast never spoken since
thy holiday."

"Everything comes from him, I think, sir."

"No, only the good, not the evil nor the negative; and it is on this
point I would advise thee, for thou art as inconsiderate as a
fledgling turned out of the nest, and art ware of nothing."

"Pray advise me, sir," I said, "and I shall be glad that I am
inconsiderate, to be advised by you."

I looked at him, and was surprised that a deep seriousness
overshadowed the constant gravity,--which was as if one entered from
the twilight a still more sombre wood.

"I intend to advise thee because thou art ignorant, though pure;
untaught, yet not weak. I would not advise thy compeers,--one is too
young, the other too old."

"Iskar too old!" I exclaimed.

"Iskar was never a child; whatever thou couldst teach him would only
ripen his follies, already too forward. He belongs to the other
world."

"There are two worlds then in music," I thought; for it had been ever
a favorite notion of my own, but I did not say so, I was watching him.
He took from the breast pocket of his coat--that long brown coat--a
little leather book, rolled up like a parchment; this he opened, and
unfolded a paper that had lain in the curves, and yet curled round
unsubmissive to his fingers. He deliberately bent it back, and held it
a moment or two, while his eyes gathered light in their fixed gaze
upon what he clasped, then smoothed it to its old shape with his palm,
and putting on his horn-set eye-glasses, which lent him an owl-like
reverendness, he began to read to me. And as I have that little paper
still, and as, if not sweet, it is very short, I shall transcribe it
here and now:--

"When thou hearest the folks prate about art, be certain thou art
never tempted to make friends there; for if they be wise in any other
respect, they are fools in this, that they know not when to keep
silence and how. For art consists not in any of its representatives,
and is of itself alone. To interpret it aright we must let it make its
own way, and those who talk about it gainsay its true impressions,
which alone remain in the bosom that is single and serene. If thou
markest well, thou wilt find how few of those who make a subsistence
out of music realize its full significance; for they are too busy to
recall that they live for it, and not by it, even though it brings
them bread. And just as few are those who set apart their musical life
from all ambition, even honorable,--for ambition is of this earth
alone, and in a higher yearning doth musical life consist; so the
irreligious many are incapable of the fervor of the few. And the few,
those I did exclude,--the few who possess in patience this
inexhaustible desire,--are those who compose my world."

"You mean, sir," I exclaimed, so warm, so glowing at my heart, that
the summer without, brooding over the blossomed lindens, was as winter
to the summer in my veins, so suddenly penetrated I felt,--"you mean,
sir, that as good people I have heard speak of the world, and of good
people who are not worldly, apart, and seem to know them from each
other,--in religion I mean,--so it is in music. I am sure my sister
thought so,--my sister in England; but she never dared to say so."

"No, of course not; there is no right to say so anywhere now, except
in Germany, for here alone has music its priesthood, and here alone,
though little enough here, is reverentially regarded as the highest
form of life, subserving to the purposes of the soul. But thou art
right to believe entirely so, that, young as thou art, thou mayest
keep thy purity, and mighty may be thy aptness to discern what is new
to thee in the old, no less than what answers to the old in the new.

"And, first, when thou goest out of leading-strings, never accustom
thyself to look for faults or feelings differing from thine own in
those set over thee. It is certain that many a student of art has lost
ground in this indulgence; for oftentimes the student, either from
natural imagination, or from the vernal innocence of youth, will be
outstripping his instructors in his grand intentions, and giving
himself up to them will be losing the present hours in the air that
should be informing themselves, with steady progress, in the strictest
mechanical course. Never till thou hast mastered every conceivable
difficulty, dream of producing the most distant musical effect.

"But, secondly, lest thine enthusiasm should perish of starvation
under this mechanical pressure, keep thy wits awake to contemplate
every artist and token of art that come between thee and daylight. And
the more thou busiest thyself in mechanical preparation, the more
leisure thou shalt discover so to observe; the more serene and
brilliant shall thy imagination find itself,--a clear sky filled with
the sunshine of that enthusiasm which spreads itself over every object
in earth and heaven.

"Again, of music, or the tone-art, as thou hast heard me name it,
never let thy conception cease. Never believe thou hast adopted the
trammels of a pursuit bounded by progress because thine own progress
bounds thine own pursuit. In despair at thy slow induction,--be it
slow as it must be gradual,--doubt not that it is into a divine and
immeasurable realm thou shalt at length be admitted; and if the
ethereal souls of the masters gone before thee have thirsted after the
infinite, even in such immeasurable space, recall thyself, and bow
contented that thou hast this in common with those above thee,--the
insatiable presentment of futurity with which the Creator has chosen
to endow the choicest of his gifts,--the gift in its perfection
granted ever to the choicest, the rarest of the race."

"And that is why it is granted to the Hebrew nation,--why they all
possess it like a right!" I cried, almost without consciousness of
having spoken. But Aronach answered not; he only slightly, with the
least motion, leaned his head so that the silver of his beard
trembled, and a sort of tremor agitated his brow, that I observed not
in his voice as he resumed.

"Thou art young, and mayest possibly excel early, as a mechanical
performer. I need not urge thee to prune the exuberance of thy fancy
and to bind thy taste--by nature delicate--to the pure, strong models
whose names are, at present, to thee their only revelation. For the
scapegrace who figures in thy daily calendar as so magnificently thy
superior, will ever stand thee instead of a warning or ominous
repulsion, so long as thy style is forming; and when formed, that
style itself shall fence thee alike with natural and artful antipathy
against the school he serves, that confesses to no restriction, no,
not the restraint of rule, and is the servant of its own caprice.

"Thou shalt find that many who profess the art, confess not to that
which they yet endure,--a sort of shame in their profession, as if
they should ennoble _it_, and not it _them_. Such professors thou
shalt ever discover are slaves, not sons; their excellence as
performers owing to the accidental culture of their imitative
instinct; and they are the _ripieni_ of the universal orchestra, whose
chief doth appear but once in every age.

"Thou shalt be set on to study by thine instructors, and, as I before
hinted, wilt ever repose upon their direction. But in applying to the
works they select for thine edification, whether theoretic or
practical, endeavor to disabuse thyself of all thy previous
impressions and prepossessions of any author whatsoever, and to absorb
thyself in the contemplation of that alone thou busiest thyself upon.

"Thus alone shall thine intelligence explore all styles, and so
separate each from each as finally to draw the exact conclusion from
thine own temperament and taste of that to which thou dost essentially
incline.

"In treating of music specifically, remember not to confound its
elements. As in ancient mythology many religious seeds were sown, and
golden symbols scattered, so may we apply its enforcing fables where
the new wisdom denies us utterance, and the nearer towards the
expression of the actual than if we observed the literal forms of
speech. Thus ever remembering that as the 'aorasia' was a word
signifying the invisibility of the gods, and the 'avatar' their
incarnation, so is _time_ the aorasia of music the god-like, and
_tone_ its avatar.

"Then, in _time_, shalt thou realize that in which the existence of
music as infallibly consists as in its manifestation, _tone_, and
thine understanding shall become invested with the true nature of
_rhythm_, which alike doth exist between time and tone, seeming to
connect in spiritual dependence the one with the other inseparably.

"In devoting thine energies to the works of art in ages behind thine
own, thou shalt never be liable to depress thy consciousness of those
which are meritorious _with_ thee, and _yet_ to come before thee. For
thou wilt learn that to follow the supreme of art with innocence and
wisdom was ever allotted to the few whose labors yet endure; while as
to the many whose high-flown perfections in their day seduced the
admiration of the myriads to the neglect of the few, except _by_ few,
find we nothing of them at present, but the names alone of their
operas, or the mention of their having been, and being now no more.
And this is while the few are growing and expanding their fame, as the
generations succeed, ever among the few of every generation, but yet
betokening in that still, secluded renown, the immortal purpose for
which they wrote and died _not_.

"Be assured that in all works that have endured there is something of
the nature of truth; therefore acquaint thyself with all, ever
reserving the right to honor with peculiar investigation those works
in which the author by scientific hold upon forceful imagination
intimates that he wrote with the direct intention to illustrate his
art, not alone for the love of it, but in the fear of its service.
Thus apply thyself to the compositions of Palestrina, of Purcell, of
Alessandro Scarlatti, and the indefatigable Corelli; thus lend thyself
to the masterpieces of Pergolesi, of Mozart, and Handel; thus lean
with thine entire soul upon the might and majesty of John Sebastian
Bach. All others in order, but these in chief; and this last
generalissimo, until thou hast learnt to govern thyself."

He paused and stayed, and the summer evening-gold crowned him as he
sat. That same rich gleam creeping in, for all the deep shade that
filled the heavenly vault, seemed to touch me with solemn ecstasy
alike with his words. He was folding up that paper, and had nearly
settled it before I dared to thank him; but as he held it out, and I
grasped it, I also kissed the ivory of his not unwrinkled hand, and he
did not withdraw it. Then I said, "My dear master, my dear, dear Herr
Aronach, is that for me to keep?"

"It is for thee," he answered; "and perhaps, as there is little of it,
thou wilt digest it more conveniently than a more abundant lecture.
Thou art imaginative, or I should not set thee laws, and implicit, or
thou wouldst not follow them."

"I should like to know, sir, whether those are the sort of rules you
gave the Chevalier Seraphael when he was a little boy?"

"No, no; they are not such as I gave him, be certain."

"I thought not, perhaps. Oh, sir, how very surprising he must have
been when he was so young and little!"

"He did not rudely declaim, thou mayest imagine, at eight years old,
and his voice was so modest to strangers that it was hard to make him
heard at all,--this it was that made me set no laws before him."

"How then, sir, did you teach him?" was my bolder question.

"He would discourse of music in its native tongue, when his small
fingers conversed with the keys of his favorite harpsichord, so
wondrously at home there, from the first time they _felt_ themselves.
And in still obedience to the law of that inborn harmony that governed
his soul, he would bend his curly pate over the score till all the
color fell off his round cheek; and his forehead would work and frown
with thoughts strong enough to make a strong man's brain quiver. I was
severe with him to save my conscience; but he ever outwitted me, nor
could I give him enough to do, for he made play of work, and no light
work of play. It was as if I should direct the south wind to blow in
summer, or the sunbeams to make haste with the fruit. At length it
came to such a pass--his calm attainment--that I gave him up to die!
He left off growing too, and there was of him so little that you would
have thought him one the pleasant folk had changed at birth: bright
enough were his eyes for such suspicion. So I clapped upon him one day
as he was lying upon a bit of shade in my garden, his cap of velvet
tumbled off, and the feather flying as you please, while over the
score of Graun he had fallen fast asleep. When I came to him, I
thought the little heart-strings had given way, to let him free
altogether, he lay so still and heavy in his slumber, and no breath
came through his lips that I could see. So I took him up, never waking
him, and laid him away in bed, and locked up every staved sheet that
lay about, and every score and note-book, and shut the harpsichord;
and when at last he awoke, I took him upon my knee,--for it was then
he came to my house for his lessons, and I could do with him as I
pleased. 'Now,' said I, 'thou hast been asleep over thy books, and I
have carried them all away, for thou art lazy, and shalt see them
never again, unless thou art content to do as I shall bid thee.'

"Then he looked into my face with his kind child's eyes, and said,--

"'I wish that thou wert my pupil, master; for if so, I should show
thee how I should like to be taught.'

"'Well, thou art now very comfortable on my knee, and mayest pull my
watch-chain if thou wilt, and shalt also tell me the story of what
thou shouldst teach thine old, grand pupil,--we will make a play of
it.'

"'I do not care to pull thy chain now, but I should like to watch thy
face while I tell thee.'

"So then, Master Carl, this elf stood upright on my knees, and spread
out his arms, and laughed loud till the wet pearls shone; and while I
held his feet--for I thought he would fly away--says he to mock me,--

"'Now, Master Aronach, thou mayest go home and play with thy little
sister at kings and queens, and never do any more lessons till thou
art twelve years old; for that is the time to be a man and do great
things: and now thou art a poor baby, who cannot do anything but play
and go to sleep. And all the big books are put away, and nobody is to
bring them out again until thou art big and canst keep awake.'

"Then I looked at him hard, to see whether he was still mocking me;
but when I found he looked rather about to cry, I set him down, and
took my hat, and walked out of my house to the lower ramparts. On the
lower ramparts stood the fine house of his father, and I rang the bell
quite free, and went boldly up the stairs. His mother was alone in her
grand drawing-room, and I said that she might either come and fetch
him away altogether, or let him stay with me and amuse himself as he
cared for; that I would not teach him for those years to come, as he
had said. The stately lady was offended, and carried him off from me
altogether; and when he went he was very proud, and would not shed one
tear, though he clung round my collar and whispered, elf that he
was,--'I shall come back when I am twelve. Hush! master, hush!'"

"And did he come back?" I cried, no less in ecstasy at the story than
at the confidence reposed in me.

"All in good time--peace," said Aronach. "I never saw him again until
the twenty-second morning of May, in the fourth year after his mother
carried him off. I heard of the wonder-boy from every mouth,--how he
was taken here, and flourished there, to show off; and petted and
praised by the king; and I thought often how piteous was it thus to
spoil him. On that very morning I was up betimes, and was writing a
letter to an old friend of mine whose daughter was dead, when I heard
feet like a fawn that was finding quick way up my dark stairs, and I
stopped to listen. The door was burst open all in a moment, as if by
the wind, and there he stood, in his little hat and feather and his
gay new dress, bright as a birthday prince, with a huge lumbering
flower-pot in his two little arms. He set that upon the floor and
danced up to me directly, climbing upon my knees. 'Will you take me
back? For I am twelve, and nobody else can teach me! I know all
_they_ know.'

"He folded his little arms together round my collar, and held on there
tight. What a minimus he was! scarcely a half-foot taller; but with
such a noble air, and those same kind eyes of old. I pinched his fair
cheek, which was red as any rose; but it was only a blossom born of
the morning air: as he still sat upon my knees, the beauteous color
fell, faded quite away, and left him pale,--pale as you now see him,
Master Carl."

"Oh, sir! tell me a little, little more. What did he tell you? What
did he do?"

"He told me, with the pale face pressed against my coat, 'Thou seest,
sweet master, I would not take pains just at first, and mamma was very
grand; she never blessed me for a week, and I never kissed her. I did
lessons with her, though, and tried to plague her, and played very
sad, very ill, and would hardly read a bar. So mamma took it into her
head to say that _you_ had not taught me properly; and I grew very
wild, angry,--so hurt at least that I burst out, and ran downstairs,
and came no more for lessons five whole days. Then I begged her
pardon, and she sent for Herr Hümmel to teach me. I played my very
best to Herr Hümmel, master mine!'

"'I daresay he did,' thought I, 'the naughty one! the elf!' There he
lay back with his pale face, and all the mischief in his starry eyes.

"'And Herr Hümmel,' my loveling went on, pursing his lips, 'said he
could not teach me to play, but perhaps he could teach me to write. So
I wrote for him ever so many pages, and he could not read them, for I
wrote so small, so small; and Herr Hümmel has such very weak eyes!'

"Oh! how naughty he looked, lying across my knees!

"'And then,' he prattled, 'mamma set herself to look for somebody very
new and great; and she picked up Monsieur Milans-André, who is a very
young master, only nineteen years old; and mamma says he is a great
genius. Now, as for me, dear master, I don't know what a great genius
is; but if Monsieur André be one, _thou_ art not one, nor I.'

"Oh, the haughty one! still prattling on,--

"'I did take pains, and put myself back, that he might show me over
again what you, dear master, had taught me, so that I never forget,
and could not forget, if I tried; and in a year I told mamma I would
never touch the harpsichord again if she did not promise I should come
back to you again. She said she couldn't promise, and, master, I never
_did_ again touch the harpsichord, but instead, I learned what was
better, to play on Monsieur André's grand pianoforte!'

"'And how didst thou admire that, eh?' I asked, rather curious about
the matter.

"'Oh! it is very comfortable; I feel quite clear about it, and have
written for it some things. But Monsieur André is to go a tour, so he
told mamma yesterday, and this morning before he came I ran away, and
I am returned to you, and have brought my tree to keep my birthday
with you. And, master mine, I _won't_ go back again!'

"Before I could answer him, as I expected, comes a pull at the bell to
draw the house down, and up the stairs creaks Rathsherr Seraphael, the
father, a mighty good looking and very grand man. He takes a seat, and
looks queer and awful. But the little one, quitting me, dances round
and round his chair and kisses away that frown.

"'Dear and beautiful papa, thou must give me leave to stay I am thine
only son!'

"'Thou art indeed, and hast never before disobeyed me. Why didst thou
run away, my Adonais?'

"'Papa, _he_ can only teach me; I will _not_ leave him, for I must
obey music before you, and in him music calls me.'

"He ran back to my knee, and there his father left him (but very
disconcerted), and I don't know how they settled it at home. But
enough for me, there was never any more difficulty, and he and I kept
his birthday together; the little candles burned out among the
linden-flowers, and beautiful presents came for him and for me from
the great house on the ramparts.

"And he never left me," added Aronach, with a prodigious pleasure too
big to conceal either by word or look, "he never left me until he set
off for his travels all over Europe, during which travels I removed,
and came up here a long distance from the old place, where I had him
all to myself, and he was all to me."

"Thanks, dear master, if I too may so call you. I shall always feel
that you are; but I did not know how very much you had to do with
him."

"Thou mayest so name me, because thou art not wanting in veneration,
and canst also be _mastered_."

"Thanks forever. And I may keep this precious paper? In your own
writing, sir, it will be more than if you had said it, you know,
though I should have remembered every word. And the story, too, is
just as safe as if you had written it for me."

And so it was.


END OF VOL. I.

FOOTNOTE:

[17] Famous theorists and contrapuntists of the eighteenth century;
the latter was the teacher of Beethoven.




THE LAUREL-CROWNED LETTERS.


      =The Best Letters of Lord Chesterfield.= Edited, with an
      Introduction, by EDWARD GILPIN JOHNSON.

      =The Best Letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.= Edited, with
      an Introduction, by OCTAVE THANET.

      =The Best Letters of Horace Walpole.= Edited, with an
      Introduction, by ANNA B. MCMAHAN.

      =The Best Letters of Madame de Sévigné.= Edited, with an
      Introduction, by EDWARD PLAYFAIR ANDERSON.

      Each volume is finely printed and bound; 16mo, cloth, gilt
      tops, price, $1.00.

      In half calf or half morocco, per vol., $2.75.

Of LORD CHESTERFIELD'S LETTERS, the _Atlantic Monthly_ says:--

      The editor seems to make good his claims to have treated
      these letters with such discrimination as to render the book
      really serviceable, not only as a piece of literature, but as
      a text-book in politeness.

Of LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU'S LETTERS, the _New York Star_ says:--

      The selection is indeed an excellent one, and the notes by
      the present editor considerably enhance their value.

Of HORACE WALPOLE'S LETTERS, the _Philadelphia Public Ledger_ says:--

      These witty and entertaining letters show Walpole to bear out
      the promise of his fame,--the prince of letter-writers in an
      age which elevated the occupation into a fine art.

Of MADAME DE SÉVIGNÉ'S LETTERS, the _Boston Saturday Gazette_ says:--

      Accomplished, witty, pure, Madame de Sévigné's noble
      character is reflected in her writings, which will always
      hold a foremost place in the estimation of those who can
      appreciate high moral and intellectual qualities.




LAUREL-CROWNED TALES.


      ABDALLAH; OR, THE FOUR-LEAVED SHAMROCK. BY EDOUARD LABOULAYE.
      Translated by MARY L. BOOTH.

      RASSELAS, PRINCE OF ABYSSINIA. By SAMUEL JOHNSON.

      RAPHAEL; OR, PAGES OF THE BOOK OF LIFE AT TWENTY. From the
      French of ALPHONSE DE LAMARTINE.

      THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. By OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

      THE EPICUREAN. By THOMAS MOORE.

      PICCIOLA. By X. B. SAINTINE.

_Other volumes in preparation._

Handsomely printed from new plates, on fine laid paper, 12mo, cloth,
with gilt tops, price per volume, $1.00.

In half calf or half morocco, $2.75.

      In planning this series, the publishers have aimed at a form
      which should combine an unpretentious elegance suited to the
      fastidious book-lover with an inexpensiveness that must
      appeal to the most moderate buyer.

      It is the intent to admit to the series only such tales as
      have for years or for generations commended themselves not
      only to the fastidious and the critical, but also to the
      great multitude of the refined reading public,--tales, in
      short, which combine purity and classical beauty of style
      with perennial popularity.




MONK AND KNIGHT.

An Historical Study in Fiction.

BY THE REV. DR. F. W. GUNSAULUS.

Two Vols. 12mo, 707 pages. Price, $2.50.


      This work is one that challenges attention for its ambitious
      character and its high aim. It is an historical novel,--or,
      rather, as the author prefers to call it, "An Historical
      Study in Fiction." It is the result of long and careful study
      of the period of which it treats, and hence is the product of
      genuine sympathies and a freshly-fired imagination. The field
      is Europe, and the period is the beginning of the sixteenth
      century,--a time when the fading glow of the later
      Renaissance is giving place to the brighter glories of the
      dawning Reformation.

      The book deals, in a broad sense, with the grand theme of the
      progress of intellectual liberty. Many of its characters are
      well-known historical personages,--such as Erasmus, Sir
      Thomas More, Cardinal Wolsey, Henry VIII. of England, Francis
      I. of France, the disturbing monk Martin Luther, and the
      magnificent Pope Leo X.; other characters are of course
      fictitious, introduced to give proper play to the author's
      fancy and to form a suitable framework for the story.

      Interwoven with the more solid fabric are gleaming threads of
      romance; and bright bits of description and glows of
      sentiment relieve the more sombre coloring. The memorable
      meeting of the French and English monarchs on the Field of
      the Cloth of Gold, with its gorgeous pageantry of knights and
      steeds and silken banners, and all the glitter and charm of
      chivalry, furnish material for several chapters, in which the
      author's descriptive powers are put to the severest test;
      while the Waldensian heroes in their mountain homes,
      resisting the persecutions of their religious foes, afford
      some thrilling and dramatic situations.




MARTHA COREY.

_A TALE OF THE SALEM WITCHCRAFT._

BY CONSTANCE GODDARD DU BOIS.

12mo, 314 pages. Price, $1.25.


      The same material drawn upon by Longfellow for his "New
      England Tragedies" is here used with greater fulness and with
      no less historical exactitude. The story has for its
      background the dark and gloomy pictures of the witchcraft
      persecution, of which it furnishes a thrilling view. It is
      remarkable for bold imagination, wonderfully rapid action,
      and continued and absorbing interest.

      In short, it is too good a piece of fiction to be accepted as
      truth, which is to the credit of the author's imaginative
      powers; for "Martha Corey" is an absorbing tale.--_Public
      Ledger, Philadelphia._

      The story is curious and quaint, differing totally from the
      novels of this day; and the pictures of life among the early
      inhabitants of Massachusetts show that the author has been an
      untiring and faithful student for her work.--_Weekly Item,
      Philadelphia._

      The characters are well delineated; the language is smooth
      and refined; and from frequent change of scene and character
      the book is rendered very entertaining. The passions, love
      and hate, are carefully analyzed and faithfully described. It
      is a valuable little book.--_Globe, Chicago._

      An interesting tale of love and intrigue.... Miss Du Bois has
      given us a very readable book, and has succeeded where others
      have failed.--_Advertiser, Boston._

      The story of this book is pleasantly told; and as a picture
      of those sad times, when some of the worst and the best, of
      the darkest and the brightest, of the most hateful and the
      most lovable traits of human nature were openly manifested,
      is well worth reading.--_Illustrated Christian Weekly, New
      York._

      A story of marked strength, both of imagination and
      narration.--_Home Journal, New York._




THE BEVERLEYS.

_A Story of Calcutta._

BY MARY ABBOTT,

Author of "Alexia," etc.

12mo, 264 pages. Price, $1.25.


      The uncommonly favorable reception of Mrs. Abbott's brilliant
      novelette, "Alexia," by the public bespeaks in advance a
      lively interest in her new novel, "The Beverleys." It is a
      more extended and ambitious work than the former, but has the
      same grace of style and liveliness of treatment, together
      with a much more considerable plot and more subtle
      delineations of character and life. The action of the story
      takes place in India, and reveals on the part of the
      authoress the most intimate knowledge of the official life of
      the large and aristocratic English colony in Calcutta. The
      local coloring is strong and unusual.

      A more joyous story cannot be imagined.... A harum-scarum
      good-nature; a frank pursuit of cakes and ale; a heedless,
      happy-go-lucky spirit, are admirable components in a novel,
      however trying they may be found in the walks of daily life.
      Such are the pleasures of "The Beverleys." To read it is
      recreation, indeed.--_Public Ledger, Philadelphia._

      The author writes throughout with good taste, and with a
      quick eye for the picturesque.--_Herald, New York._

      It is a pretty story, charmingly written, with cleverly
      sketched pictures of various types of character.... The book
      abounds in keen, incisive philosophy, wrapped up in
      characteristic remarks.--_Times, Chicago._

      An absorbing story. It is brilliantly and vivaciously
      written.--_Literary World, Boston._

      The author has until now been known, so far as we are aware,
      only by her former story, "Alexia." Unless signs fail which
      seldom _do_ fail, these two with which her name is now
      associated are simply the forerunners of works in a like vein
      of which American literature will have reason to be
      proud.--_Standard, Chicago._




THE BRIDGE OF THE GODS.

_A ROMANCE OF INDIAN OREGON._

By F. H. BALCH.

12mo, 280 pages. Price, $1.25.


      This is a masterly and original delineation of Indian life.
      It is a strong story, charged with the elemental forces of
      the human heart. The author portrays with unusual power the
      intense, stern piety of the ministers of colonial New
      England, and the strange mingling of dignity, superstition,
      ferocity, and stoicism that characterized the early Indian
      warriors.

      There is no need of romancing, and Mr. Balch's scenic
      descriptions are for all practical purposes real
      descriptions. The legends he relates of the great bridge
      which once spanned the Columbia, for which there is some
      substantial history, adds to the mystical charms of the
      story. His Indian characters are as real as if photographed
      from life. No writer has presented a finer character than the
      great chief of the Willamettes, Multnomah; Snoqualmie the
      Cayuse; or Tohomish the Seer. The night visit of Multnomah to
      the tomb of his dead wife upon that lonely island in the
      Willamette is a picture that will forever live in the
      reader's memory.... To those who have traversed the ground,
      and know something of Indian character and the wild, free
      life of pioneer days, the story will be
      charming.--_Inter-Ocean, Chicago._

      It is a truthful and realistic picture of the powerful Indian
      tribes that inhabited the Oregon country two centuries
      ago.... It is a book that will be of value as a historical
      authority; and as a story of interest and charm, there are
      few novels that can rival it.--_Traveller, Boston._

      There is much and deep insight in this book. The characters
      stand in clear outline, and are original. The movement of the
      story is quick and varied, like the running water of the
      great river.--_The Pacific, San Francisco._

      Its field is new for fiction; it is obviously the work of one
      who has bestowed a great deal of study on the subjects he
      would illustrate. It is very interesting reading, fluently
      written.--_Times, Chicago._

     _Sold by all booksellers, or mailed, on receipt of price, by_
     A. C. MCCLURG & CO., PUBLISHERS,
     COR. WABASH AVE. AND MADISON ST., CHICAGO.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Charles Auchester, Volume 1 of 2, by 
Elizabeth Sheppard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES AUCHESTER, VOLUME 1 OF 2 ***

***** This file should be named 38949-8.txt or 38949-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/9/4/38949/

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's Charles Auchester, Volume 2 (of 2), by Elizabeth Sheppard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Charles Auchester, Volume 2 (of 2)

Author: Elizabeth Sheppard

Release Date: July 16, 2012 [EBook #40259]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES AUCHESTER, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  The following possible typographical errors were left uncorrected:
  Page 173:  "musical electicism" should possibly be "musical
    eclecticism"
  Page 228: "eflish mood" should possibly be "elfish mood"
  Page 295: "Dunisnane" should possibly be "Dunsinane"




  CHARLES AUCHESTER

  VOLUME II.

  [Illustration: MENDELSSOHN
    FROM A SKETCH MADE IN HIS YOUTH.]




  CHARLES AUCHESTER

  BY
  ELIZABETH SHEPPARD

  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES_
  By GEORGE P. UPTON

  AUTHOR OF "THE STANDARD OPERAS," "STANDARD ORATORIOS," "STANDARD
  CANTATAS," "STANDARD SYMPHONIES," "WOMAN IN MUSIC," ETC.

  In Two Volumes

  VOLUME II.
  A. C. McCLURG AND COMPANY
  CHICAGO
  1891




  COPYRIGHT,
  BY A. C. MCCLURG AND CO.
  A. D. 1891.




CHARLES AUCHESTER.




CHAPTER I.


Well, as if but yesterday, do I remember the morning I set out from
Lorbeerstadt for Cecilia. I had no friends yet with whom to
reconnoitre novel ground; I was quite solitary in my intentions, and
rather troubled with a vague melancholy, the sun being under cloud,
and I not having wished Aronach good-day. He was out in the town
fulfilling the duties of his scholastic pre-eminence, and I had vainly
sought him for an audience. He had surrendered me my violin when he
gave me the paper in his writing, and I also carried my certificate in
my hand. Of all my personal effects I took these only,--my bed and
bedding, my clothes and books having preceded me; or, at least, having
taken another form of flight. Iskar was to come also that time, but
did not intend to present himself until the evening. Aronach had also
forewarned me to take a coach, but I rather chose to walk, having
divine reminiscences upon that earthly road.

With Starwood I had a grievous parting, not unallayed by hope on my
part, and I left him wiping his eyes,--an attention which deeply
affected me, though I did not cry myself.

I shall never forget the singularly material aspect of things when I
arrived. Conventionalism is not so rampant in Germany as in England,
and courtesy is taught another creed. I think it would be impossible
to be anywhere more free, and yet this sudden liberty (like a sudden
light) did but at first serve to dazzle and distress me. Only half the
students had returned, and they, all knowing each other, or seeming to
do so, were standing in self-interested fraternities, broken by groups
and greeters, in one immense hall, or what appeared to me immense, and
therefore desolate. I came in through the open gates to the open
court; through the open court into the open entry and from that region
was drawn to the door of that very hall by the hollow multitudinous
echo that crept upon the stony solitude. It was as real to me a
solitude to enter that noble space; and I was more abashed than ever,
when, on looking round, I perceived none but males in all the company.
There was not even a picture of the patron saintess; but there _was_ a
picture, a dark empannelled portrait, high over the long
dining-tables. I concluded from the style that it was a representation
of one Gratianos, the Bachist, of whom I had once heard speak.

The gentlemen in the hall were none of them full grown, and none
wonderfully handsome at first sight. But the manner of their
entertainment was truly edifying to me, who had not long been "out" in
any sense. They every one either had been smoking, were smoking, or
were about to smoke,--that is, most of them had pipes in their mouths,
or those who had them not in their mouths had just plucked them
therefrom, and were holding them in their hands, or those who had not
yet begun were preparing the apparatus.

In a corner of the hall, which looked dismally devoid of furniture to
an English eye, there was a great exhibition of benches. There were
some upright, others kicking their feet in the air, but all packed so
as to take little space, and these were over and above the benches
that ran all round the hall. In this corner a cluster of individuals
had collected after a fashion that took my fancy in an instant, for
they had established themselves without reference to the primary use
and endowment of benches at all. Some sat on the legs thereof,
upturned, with their own feet at the reversed bottoms, and more than a
few were lying inside those reversed bottoms, with distended veins and
excited complexions, suggesting the notion that they were in the
enjoyment of plethoric slumber. To make a still further variation, one
bench was set on end and supported by the leaning figures of two
contemporaneous medalists; and on the summit of this bench, which also
rested against the wall, a third medalist was sitting, like an ape
upon the ledge of Gibraltar,--unlike an ape in this respect, that he
was talking with great solemnity, and also that he wore gloves, which
had once on a time been white. The rest were bareheaded, but all were
fitted out with mustachios, either real or fictitious, for I had my
doubts of the soft, dark tassels of the Stylites, as his own pate was
covered with hemp,--it cannot have been hair. Despite its
grotesqueness, this group, as I have said, attracted me, for there was
something in every one of the faces that set me at my ease, because
they appeared in earnest at their fun.

I came up to them as I made out their composition, and they one and
all regarded me with calm, not malicious, indifference. They were very
boyish for young men, and very manly for young boys, certainly; and
remained, as to their respective ages, a mystery. The gentleman on the
pedestal did not even pause until he came to a proper climax,--for he
was delivering an oration,--and I arrived in time to hear the
sentence so significant: "So that all who in verity apply themselves
to science will find themselves as much at a loss without a body as
without a soul, for the animal property nourisheth and illustrateth
the spiritual, and the spiritual would be of no service without the
animal, any more than should the flame that eateth the wood burn in an
empty stove, or than the soup we have eaten for dinner should be soup
without the water that dissolved the component nutritives."

Here he came to a full stop, and gazed upon me through sharp-shaped
orbs. Meantime I had drawn out my certificate and handed it up to him.
He took it between those streaky gloves, and having fixed a horn-set
glass into his one eye, shut up the other and perused the paper. I
don't know why I gave it to him in particular, except that he was very
high up, and had been speaking. But I had not done wrong, for he
finished by bowing to me with exceeding patronage.

"One of us, I presume?"

"Credentials!" groaned one who was, as I had supposed, asleep. But my
patron handed me very politely my envelope, and gravely returned to
the treatment of his theme,--whatever that might have been. Nobody
appeared to listen except his twain supporters, and they only seemed
attentive because they were thoroughly fumigated, and had their senses
under a spell. The rest began to yawn, to sneer, and to lift their
eyes, or rather the lids of them. I need scarcely say I felt very
absurd, and at last, on the utterance of an exceedingly ridiculous
peroration from the orator, I yielded at once to the impulse of
timidity, and began to laugh. The effect was of sympathetic magnetism.
Everybody whose lips were disengaged began to laugh too; and finally,
those very somnolent machines, that the benches propped, began to
stir, to open misty glances, and to grin like purgatorial saints. This
laugh grew a murmur, the murmur a roar, and finally the supporters
themselves, fairly shaking, became exhausted, staggered, and let the
pedestal glide slowly forwards. The theorist must certainly have
anticipated such a crisis, for he spread his arms and took a flying
jump from that summit, descending elegantly and conveniently as a cat
from a wall upon the boarded floor.

"Schurke!"[1] said he to me, and held me up a threatening hand; but,
seized with a gleeful intention, I caught at it, and with one pull
dragged off his glove. The member thus exposed was evidently petted by
its head, for it was dainty and sleek, and also garnished with a
blazing ring; and he solemnly held it up to contemplate it, concluding
such performance by giving one fixed stare to each nail in particular.
Then he flew at me in a paroxysm of feigned fierceness; but I had
already flung the glove to the other end of the hall. The whole set
broke into a fresh laugh, and one said, "Thou mightest have sent it up
to the beard there, if thou hadst only thought of it."

"Never too late, Mareschal!" cried another, as he made a stride to
fetch the glove, which, however, lay three or four strides off. He
gathered it up at last, crumpled it in his hand, and threw it high
against the wall. It just missed the picture though, and fell at the
feet of two perambulators arm-in-arm, one of whom stood upon the glove
till the other pushed him off, and gave the forlorn kidling a
tremendous kick that sent it farther than ever from the extempore
target. There was now a gathering and rush of a dozen towards it.
They tore it one from the other again; and, once more flinging it
high,--this time successfully,--it hit that panelled portrait just
upon the nose. A shout, half revengeful, half triumphant, echoed
through the hall; but the game was not at its height.

"Gloves out, everybody!" cried several; and from all the pockets
present, as it seemed, issued a miscellaneous supply. Very innocently,
I gave up a pair of old wool ones that I happened to have with me; and
soon, very soon, a regular systematized pelting commenced of that
reverend representation in its recess.

I am very sure I thought it all fun at first; and as there is nothing
I like so well as fun after music, I lent myself quite freely to the
sport. About fifty pairs of gloves were knotted and crumpled, pair by
pair, into balls, and whoever scrambled fastest secured the most. As
the unsuccessful shots fell back, they were caught by uplifted hands
and banged upwards with tenfold ardor, and no one was so ardent and
risibly dignified as the worthy of the pedestal. He behaved as if some
valuable stake were upon his every throw; and further, I observed that
after the game once began, nobody, except myself, laughed. It was, at
least, for half an hour that the banging, accompanied by a tremulous
hissing, continued. I myself laughed so much that I could not throw,
but I stood to watch the others. So high was the picture placed that
very few were the missiles to reach it; and such as touched the
time-seared canvas elicited an excitement I could neither realize nor
respond to. All at once it struck me as very singular they should pelt
that particular spot on the wall, and I instantly conjectured them to
be inimical to the subject of the delineation. I was just making up my
mind to inquire, when the great door hoarsely creaked, and a voice
was heard, quite in another key from the murmurous shout, to penetrate
my ear at that distance, so that I immediately responded,--"Has Carl
Auchester arrived?"

There was no reply, nor any suspension of the performance on hand,
except on my part. But for me I turned, gladly, yet timorously, and
joined the speaker in a moment. He greeted me with what appeared to me
an overawing polish, though, in fact, it was but the result of
temperament not easily aroused. He was very slim and fair, and though
not tall, gave me the impression of one very much more my senior than
he really was. He held his arm as a kind of barrier between me and the
door until I was safely out of the hall; then said to me, in a tone of
chill but still remonstrance,--

"Why did you go in there? That was not a good beginning."

"Sir," I replied, not stammered, for I felt my cause was good, "how
was I to know I ought not to go in there? It seemed quite the proper
place, with all those Cecilians about; and, besides, no one told me
where else to go. But if I did wrong, I won't go in there again, and I
certainly have not been harmed yet."

"You must go there at times; it is there you will have to eat. But a
few who are really students hold aloof from the rest, who idle
whenever they are not strictly employed, as you have had reason to
notice. I was induced to come and look for you, of whom I should
otherwise have no knowledge, in obedience to the Chevalier Seraphael's
request that I should do so."

"Did he really remember me in that manner? How good, how angelic!" I
cried. And yet I did not quite find my new companion charming; his
irresistible quiescence piqued me too much, though he was anything
but haughty.

"Yes, he is good, and was certainly very good to bear in mind one so
young as you are; I hope you will reward his kindness. He gives us
great hopes of you."

"Are you a professor, sir?" I asked, half afraid of my own impulse.

"I am _your_ professor," he announced, with that same distance. "I am
first violin."

I did not know whether I was pleased or sorry at that instant, for I
could detect no magnetic power that he possessed, and rather shrank
from contact with him at present. He led me up many stairs,--a side
staircase, quite new, built steeper and narrower than the principal
flight. He led me along thwart passages, and I beheld many doors and
windows too; for light and air both reigned in these regions, which
were fresh, and smelled of health. He led me into a chamber so
lengthened that it was almost a gallery, for it was very high besides.
Here he paused to exhibit a suite of prophets' chambers, one after the
other completely to the end; for in every division was a little bed, a
bench, and washing-table, with a closet closed by hasps of wood. The
uniform arrangement struck me as monotonous, but academical. My guide,
for the first time, smiled, but very slightly, and explained,--

"This is my division,--_les petits violons_, you know, Auchester; you
may see the numbers on every alcove. And here you practise, except
when met in class or at lecture. Your number is 13, and you are very
nearly in the middle. See, you have a curtain to draw before your bed,
and in this closet there is a box for books, as well as a niche for
your instrument, and abundant room for clothes, unless you bring more
than you can possibly want. The portmanteau and chest, which were
brought this morning, you may keep here, if you please, as well."

I did not thank him, for I was pre-occupied with an infernal
suggestion to my brain, which I revealed in my utter terror.

"Oh, sir, do we all practise together, then? What a horrible noise!
and how impossible to do anything so! I can't, I know!"

Another half-smile curled the slender brown moustache.

"It was indeed so in the times I can still remember. But see how much
more than you can own you are indebted to this Chevalier Seraphael!"

He walked to the wall opposite the alcove, and laying hold of a brass
ring I had not noticed, drew out a long slide of wood, very thick and
strong, which shut one in from side to side.

"There is such a one to every bed," continued he; "and if you draw
them on either hand, you will hear nothing, at least nothing to
disturb you. Come away now; I have not much time to spare, and must
leave you elsewhere."

He led me from the chambers, and down the stairs again, and here and
there, so that I heard an organ playing in one region, and voices that
blended again to another idea; and then all was stillness, except the
rustle of his gown. But before I could make up my mind to approve or
criticise the arrangements which struck me on every hand, I found
myself in another room,--this vaulted, and inspiring as nothing I had
met with in that place. How exquisite was the radiant gloom that here
pervaded within, as within a temple; for the sunshine pierced through
little windows of brown and amber, and came down in wavering dusky
brightness on parchment hues and vellum, morocco, and ruddy gold. Here
a thick matting returned no footfall; and although the space was
small, and very crowded too, yet it had an air of vastness, from the
elevated concave of the roof. Benches were before each bookcase, that
presented its treasury of dread tomes and gigantic scores; also
reading-desks; and besides such furniture, there were the quaintest
little stalls between each set of shelves,--shrine-like niches one
could just sit in, or even at pleasure lie along; for seats were in
them of darkest polished wood. Some were already occupied, and their
occupants were profoundly quiet,--perhaps studying, perhaps asleep.

"Here," observed my guide, "you are only allowed to come and remain in
silence. If one word be spoken in the library, expulsion of the
speaker follows. The book-keeper sits out there," pointing to an
erection like a watch-box, "and hears, and is to observe all. You may
use any book in this place, but never carry it away; and if required
for quotation as well as for reference, you may here make your
extracts, but never elsewhere. There are ink-bottles in every desk.
And if you take my advice, you will remain here until the supper-bell;
for while here, you will at least be out of mischief. We are not
to-day in full routine; but that makes it the more dangerous to be at
large."

"Will you set me some task, then, sir? I do want something to be at."

He seemed only to sneer at such a desire. "Nonsense! there is enough
for to-day in mastering all those names;" and he took down a catalogue
and handed it to me.

I ran into one of those dear, dark recesses, and there he left me.

When he had gone, I did not open my book for a time. I was in a highly
wrought mood, which was induced by that sombre-tinted, struggling
sunshine, whose beams played high in the ceiling, like fireflies in a
cedar shade, so fretted and so far. It was delicious as a dream to be
safe and solitary in that dim palace of futurity, whose vistas
stretched before me into everlasting lengths of light. I read not for
a long, long hour; and when I did open my book (itself no mean volume
as to size), I was bewildered and bedimmed by a swarm of names, both
of works and authors, I had never heard of,--Huygens, Martini, Euler,
Pfeiffer, and Marpurg alone meeting me as distant acquaintances, and
Cherubini as a dear old friend.

This was, in fact, a _catalogue raisonné_, and I was not in a very
rational mood. I therefore shut the book, and began to pace the
library. It is extraordinary how intense is the power of application
in the case of those who are apprenticed to a master they can worship
as well as serve. I thought so then. Nothing could divert the
attention of those supine students in the recesses, nor of the scribes
at the desks. I went quite close to many of them, and could have
looked into their eyes, but that they were, for the most part, closed;
and I should have accused them of being asleep but that their lips
were moving, and I knew they were learning by heart. Great
black-letter was the characteristic of one huge volume I stayed to
examine as it lay upon a desk, and he who sat before it had a face
sweeter than any present, sensible as interesting; and I did not fear
him, though his eyes were wide open and alert. He was making copious
extracts, and as I peeped between the pages he held by his thumb and
a slight forefinger, he observed me and gave me a smile, at the same
time turning back the title-page for my inspection. That was encircled
by a wreath of cherubs' faces for flowers, and musical instruments for
leaves, old and droll as the title, "Caspar Bartholin, his Treatise on
the Wind Music of the Ancients."

I smiled then, and nodded, to express my thanks; but a moment
afterwards he wrote for me, on a sheet in his blotting-case, which he
carried with him,--

"We may write, though we may not speak. Are you just arrived?"

He handed me the pen to answer, and I wrote: "Only an hour or two ago;
and I got into a scrape directly. I am Carl Auchester, from England;
but I am not English. What is your name?"

He smiled warmly as he read, and thus our correspondence proceeded:
"Franz Delemann. What was your scrape? I wonder you had one, now I
know your name."

"Why?" I replied. "There is no reason why I should keep clear any more
than another; but I went into the great hall, where so many of them
were about, and they made a great noise, for they were pelting the
picture that is on the wall; and while I was helping them, just for
fun, the gentleman who brought me in here fetched me out, and said it
was a bad beginning."

"That was his way of putting it," resumed my new associate. "He is
very matter-of-fact, that Anastase, but I know what he meant. We are a
very small party, and the rest persecute us. They would have been glad
to get you over to their side, because it would have been such a
triumph for them,--coming first, as you did come."

Oh! how I did scribble in response. "I have not an idea what you mean.
Pray tell me quickly."

"The Chevalier Seraphael took the place here of somebody very unlike
him. I thought the Cerinthias had told you."

"The what?"

"The Fräulein who came in with you the day of the concert, who came to
the pavilion with Seraphael and yourself, was one of the Cerinthias. I
thought, of course, you knew all; for her words are better than any
one's, and you had been together,--so she told me afterwards."

"Is she Cerinthia? What a queer name!"

"They are a queer set, though I don't suppose there ever was such a
set. The brother and the two sisters appear to possess every natural
gift among them. The father was a great singer and celebrated master,
but not a German. He came here to secure their education in a certain
style, and just as he got here, he died. Then the brother, though they
had not a penny among them all, made way by his extraordinary talent;
and as he could play on any instrument, he was admitted to the second
place in the band, and his sister was taken upon the foundation.
Milans-André made a great deal of their being here, though it was
perfectly natural, _I_ think. The youngest had been put out to nurse,
and kept in some province of France until old enough to be admitted
also; but then something happened which changed that notion. For when
Seraphael took the place of Milans-André, he had every arrangement
investigated, that he might improve to the utmost; and it was
discovered--after this fashion--that this Maria Cerinthia had been
allowed to occupy a room which was inferior to all the others. I think
the rain came in, but I am not sure of that,--I only know it was out
of the way and wretched. Seraphael was exceedingly vexed, almost in a
passion, but turned it into amusement, as he does so often before
others when he is serious at heart. He had the room turned into what
it was just fit for,--a closet for fagots.

"Then this proud Cerinthia--the brother, I mean, whose name, by the
way, is Joseph--took offence himself; and declaring no arrangement
should be altered on account of his sister, took her away, and had a
lodging in the village instead. She comes here every day at the same
time, and is what we call an out-Cecilian,--never staying to meals or
to sleep, that is. Seraphael took no notice; and I was rather
surprised to discover that he has been to see them several
times,--because, you see, I thought _he_ was proud in his way to have
his generosity rejected."

"Does he like them so very much, then?"

"He ought."

Now, I wanted to be very angry at the intimation, but my informant had
too expressive a face; so I merely added, "They are then very
wonderful?"

"They are all wonderful, and the little one, who is not quite eight
years old (for she has come to live with them since they lived alone),
is a prodigy, but not beautiful, like the one you saw."

"_She_ is, I suppose, the cleverest in all the house?"

"She must be so; but is so very quiet one does not hear about her,
except at the close of the semester, when she carries off the
medals,--for everything of the best belongs to her. She is a vocalist,
and studies, of course, in the other wing; we never meet the ladies,
you know, except in public."

"Oh! of course not. Now, do tell me what you mean about the two
parties."

"I mean that when Milans-André went away no one knew how much mischief
he had done. His whole system was against Bach, and this is properly a
school for Bach. He could not eradicate the foundation, and he could
not confess his dislike against our master in so many words. The only
thing was to introduce quite a new style, or I am sure it might be
called 'school,' for he has written such an immense deal. It was an
opera of his, performed in this town, that at once did for him as far
as those were concerned whom he had deceived, and that determined us
not to submit ourselves any longer. He was becoming so unpopular that
he was too happy to resign. Still, he left a number for himself behind
him greater than those who had risen against him."

"Tell me about that opera, pray. You write interesting letters, sir."

"I have interesting matter, truly. The opera was called 'Emancipation;
or, the Modern Orpheus.' The overture took in almost all of us, it was
so well put together; but I fancy you would not have approved of it,
somehow. The theatre here is very small, and was quite filled by our
own selves and a few artists,--not one amateur, for it was produced in
rehearsal. The scenery was very good, the story rambling and fiendish;
but we thought it fairy-like. There was a perfect hit in the hero, who
was a monstrous fiddle-player, to represent whom he had Paganini, as
he had not to speak a word. The heroines, who were three in number,
were a sort of musical nuns, young ladies dedicated to the art; but
they, first one, then another, fell in with the fiddler, and finding
him, became enamoured of him. He condescends to listen to the first
while she sings, or rather he comes upon her as she is singing the
coolest of all Bach's solos in the coolest possible style. He waits
till the end with commendable patience, and then, amidst infernal
gesticulations, places before her a cantata of his own, which is
something tremendous when accompanied by the orchestra. The contrasted
style, with the artful florid instrumentation, produces rapture, and
is really an _effect_, though I do not say of what kind. The next
heroine he treats to a grand scena, in which the violin is absolutely
made to speak; and as it was carried through by Paganini, you may
conjecture it was rather bewitching. The last lady he bears off
fairly, and they converse in an outlandish duet between the voice of
the lady and the violin. I can give you no outline of the plan, for
there is no plot that I could find afterwards, but merely the heads of
each part. Next comes a tumble-down church, dusty, dark, repelling to
the idea from the beginning; and you are aware of the Lutheran service
which is being droned through as we are not very likely to hear it, in
fact. By magic the scene dissolves; colored lights break from tapering
windows; arches rise and glitter like rainbows; altar-candles blaze
and tremble; crimson velvet and rustling satin fill the Gothic stalls
on either side; and while you are trying to gather in the picture, the
Stabat Mater bursts out in strains about as much like weeping as all
the mummery is like music.

"The last scene of all is a kind of temple where priests and
priestesses glide in spangled draperies, while the hierarch is hidden
behind a curtain. Busts and statues, that I suppose are intended for
certain masters, but whom it is not very easy to identify, as they are
ill fashioned and ill grouped, are placed in surrounding shrines. At
strains for signs from that curtained chief, the old heads and figures
are prostrated from the pedestals, the ruins are swept aside by some
utilitarian angel, and the finale consists in a great rush of
individuals masked, who crown the newly inaugurated statue of the
elevated Orpheus, and then dance around him to the ballet music, which
is accompanied by the chorus also, who sing his praise.

"It was very exciting while it went on,--as exciting to see as it is
absurd to remember; and there was nothing for it but applause upon the
spot. When the curtain fell, and we were crushing and pressing to get
out, having been hardly able to wake ourselves up, and yet feeling the
want that succeeds enjoyment or excitement that goes no further,--you
know how,--one chord sounded behind the curtain from one instrument
within the orchestra. It arrested us most curiously; it was mystical,
as we call it, though so simple: enough to say that under those
circumstances it seemed a sound from another sphere. It continued and
spread,--it was the People's Song you heard the day you first came to
us. It was once played through without vocal illustration, but we all
knew the words, and began to sing them.

"We were singing still in a strange sort of roar I can't describe to
you, when the music failed, and the curtain was raised on one side.
He--Seraphael, whom we knew not then--stood before us for the first
time. You know how small he is: as he stood there he looked like a
child of royal blood, his head quite turned me, it was so beautiful;
and we all stood with open mouths to see him, hoping to hear him
speak. He spread out those peculiar hands of his, and said, in his
sweet, clear voice: 'That song, oh ladies and gentlemen, which you
have shown you love so well, is very old, and you do not seem to be
aware that it is so, nor of its author. Who wrote it, made it for us,
think you?'

"His beauty and his soft, commanding voice had just the effect you
will imagine,--everybody obeyed him. One and another exclaimed,
'Hasse!' 'Vogler!' 'Hegel!' 'Storace!' 'Weber!' But it was clear the
point had not been contested. Then he folded his arms together and
laid them on his breast, with a very low bow that brought all the hair
into his eyes. Then he shook back the curls and laughed.

"'It is _Bach_, my dear and revered Sebastian Bach,--of all the Bachs
alone _the_ Bach; though indeed to any one Bach, one of us present is
not fit to hold a candle. You do not love Bach,--I do. You do not
reverence him,--he is in my religion. You do not understand him,--I am
very intimate with him. If you knew him, you too would love and
worship and desire of him to know more and more. Ladies and gentlemen,
you are all just. He has no one to take his part, as has your
nondescript modern Orpheus. I shall give a lecture on Bach in this
theatre to-morrow evening. Everybody comes in free. Only come!'

"Who could refuse him? Who could have refused him as he stood there,
and flying behind the curtain, peeped again between the folds of it
and bowed? Besides, there was a strong curiosity at work,--a curiosity
of which many were ashamed. Do I tire you?"

"More likely yourself. Do finish about the lecture."

"The supper-bell will be soon ringing, and will shake the story out of
me, so I must make haste. I can tell it you properly some time. The
next evening there was such a crowd at the door that they kicked it
in, and stood listening outside. The curtain was done away with, and
we never could make out how that organ came there which towered
behind; but there it stood, and a pianoforte in front. The Chevalier
appeared dressed in black, with nothing in his arms but a heap of
programmes, written in his own hand, which he distributed himself, for
he had no assistant. You know that Forkel has written a life of Bach?
Well, I have since read this, and have been puzzled to find how such a
poem as we listened to could have sprung from the prose of those dry
memoirs. The voice was enough, if it had not said what it did say,--so
delicious a voice to hear that no one stirred for fear of losing it.

"I cannot give you the slightest outline; but I have never read any
romance so brilliant, nor any philosophy that I could so take into
myself. The illustrations were fugue upon fugue. Oh, to hear that
organ with its grand interpretations, and the silver voice between!
and study upon study for the harpsichord that from the new pianoforte
seemed to breathe its old excitement--chorale upon chorale--until,
with that song restored to its own proper form, it ended,--I mean, the
lecture. I cannot say, though, about the ending, for I was obliged to
leave before it was over; the clear intellect was too much for me, and
the genius knocked me down. Many others left upon my very heels; but
those who stayed seemed hardly to recall a word that had been said.
All were so impressed, for that night, at least, that I can remember
nothing to compare with it, except the descriptions in your English
divinity books of the revivals in religion of your country. The next
day, however, the scoffers found their tongues again, and only we to
whom the whole affair had appeared on the occasion itself a dream,
awoke to a reality that has never left us. We have not been the same
since, and that is one reason we were so anxious you should be one
with the students of Bach even before you knew what you must
profess."

"Oh! I come from a good school, for Aronach is full of Bach. But do
tell me about the others."

"The Andréites, as they call themselves, are not precisely inimical to
Seraphael,--that would be impossible, he is so companionable, so free
and truly great; but they, one and all, slight Bach, and as some of
them are professors, and we all study under the professor of our voice
or instrument in particular, it is a pity for the fresh comers to fall
into the wrong set."

"But I am safe, at least, for I am certain that Anastase is of the
right school."

"The very best; he is a Seraphaelite. They call us Seraphaelites, and
we like it; but Seraphael does not like it, so we only use the word
now for parole,--Bruderschaft."[2]

"Why, I wonder, does he not like it?"

"Because he is too well bred."

Oh, how I enjoyed that expression! It reminded me of Lenhart Davy and
his sayings. I was just going to intrude another question when my
intention was snapped by the ringing of the bell, which made a most
imposing noise. The sound caused a sudden rush and rustle through the
library; gowned and ungowned figures forsook the nooks and benches,
and they each and all put by their books as deftly, dexterously as
Millicent used to lay her thimble into her work-box when she was a wee
maiden. They did not stare at me at all, which was very satisfactory;
and I found occasion to admire all their faces. I told my companion
so, and he laughed, rubbing his eyes and stretching; then he put his
arm about my neck in strict fraternal fashion, which gratified me
exceedingly, and not the less because he was evidently by several
years my elder. We left the library together, and right rejoiced was
I to hear myself speak again; the first thing that occurred to me to
say, I said: "Oh! I wanted so much to know what is your instrument."

"I don't think I shall tell you," he replied, in a guileless voice,
interesting as his behavior and language.

"Why not? I must know it at last, must I not?"

"Perhaps you will not think so well of me, when you know what I exist
for."

"That would make no difference, for every instrument is as great with
reference to others as some are in themselves."

"Seraphael could not have put it better. I play the trombone. It is a
great sacrifice at present."

"But," I returned, "I have not heard the instrument,--is it not a
splendid sort of trumpet? You mean it is not good for solos?"

"It is quite to itself,--a mere abstraction considered by itself; but
to the orchestra what red is to the rainbow."

"I know who said that. He puts brass last, I see."

"Oh, you are a thief! You know everything already. Yes, he does put
the violet first."

"The violin? Yes, so he called it to me; but I did not know he was
fond of calling it so."

"It is one of his theories. It was, however, one day after he had been
expounding it to a few of us who were fortunate enough to be present,
when he was glancing through the class-rooms, that he put up his
hands, and in his bright way, you know, scattering your reasoning
faculties like a burst of sunshine, said, 'Oh, you must not entertain
a word I have said to you,--it is only to be dreamed.'"

"What did he say? What had he said? Do, pray, out with it, or I cannot
eat, I am sure."

We were just outside the hall doorway now; within were light and a
hundred voices mingled. Into the dusk he gave his own, and I took it
safely home in silence.

"His theory,--oh, it was in this way! Strings first, of course,
violet, indigo, blue,--violin, violoncello, double-bass,--upon these
you repose; the vault is quite perfect. Green, the many-sounded kinds
of wood, spring-hued flutes, deeper, yet softer, clarinetti, bassoons
the darkest tone, not to be surpassed in its shade,--another vault.
The brass, of course, is yellow; and if the horns suggest the paler
dazzle, the trumpets take the golden orange, and the red is left for
the trombones,--vivid, or dun and dusk."[3]

"Oh, my goodness! I don't wonder he said it was a dream!"

"It certainly would be dangerous to think of it in any other light!"

"And you a German!" I cried. "Did you think I meant it?"

"You would mean it," he retorted, "if you knew what lip-distorting
and ear-distracting work it is practising this same trombone."

"But what is your reason, then, for choosing it, when you might choose
_mine_?"

"Do you not know that Seraphael has written as no one else for the
trombone? And he was heard to sigh, and to say, 'I shall never find
any one to play these passages!'"

"Oh, Delemann! and that was the reason you took it up? How I love you
for it!"

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Wretch.

[2] Brotherhood.

[3] The theory of the correspondence of tones and colors is an old
one. Gardner, in his "Music of Nature," traces it in the following
manner, which will be interesting as contrasted with the above:--

WIND INSTRUMENTS.

      Trombone--deep red.
      Trumpet--scarlet.
      Clarinet--orange.
      Oboe--yellow.
      Bassoon--deep yellow.
      Flute--sky blue.
      Diapason--deeper blue.
      Double diapason--purple.
      Horn--violet.

STRINGED INSTRUMENTS.

      Violin--pink.
      Viola--rose.
      Violoncello--red.
      Double-bass--crimson.

Laura Bridgman, the blind and deaf mute, it will be remembered,
likened the tone of the trumpet to scarlet.




CHAPTER II.


All lives have their prose translation as well as their ideal meaning;
how seldom _this_ escapes in language worthy, while _that_ tells best
in words. I was a good deal exhausted for several days after I entered
the school, and saw very little except my own stuntedness and
deficiency in the mirror of contemplation. For Anastase took me to
himself awfully the first morning, all alone; examined me, tortured
me, made me blush and hesitate and groan; bade me be humble and
industrious; told me I was not so forward as I might be; drenched me
with medicinal advices that lowered my mental system; and, finally,
left me in possession of a minikin edition of what I had conceived
myself the day before, but which he deprived me of at present, if not
annihilated forever.

It was doubtless a very good thing to go back to the beginning, if he
intended to re-create me; but it happened that such transmutation
could not take place twice, and it had already occurred once. Still, I
was absolved from obvious discomfiture to the regenerator by my silent
adaptations to his behavior.

That which would assuredly become a penance to the physique in dark or
wintry weather, remained still a charming matutinal romance; namely,
that we all rose at four o'clock, except any one who might be
delicate, and that we practised a couple of hours before we got
anything to eat,--I mean formally, for, in fact, we almost all
smuggled into our compartments wherewithal to keep off the natural,
which might not amalgamate with the spiritual, constraining appetite.
Those early mornings were ineffaceably effective for me; I advanced
more according to my desires than I had ever advanced before, and I
laid up a significant store of cool, sequestered memories. I could,
however, scarcely realize my own existence under these circumstances,
until the questioner within me was subdued to "contemplation" by my
first "adventure."

I had been a week in durance, if not vile, very void, for I had seen
nothing of the Cerinthias nor of their interesting young advocate,
except at table,--though certainly on these latter occasions we
surfeited ourselves with talk that whetted my curiosity to a double
edge. On the first Sunday, however, I laid hold of him coming out of
church, when we had fulfilled our darling duties in the choir,--for
the choir of our little perfect temple, oak-shaded and sunlit, was
composed entirely of Cecilians, and I have not time in this place to
dilate upon its force and fulness. Delemann responded joyously to my
welcome; and when I asked him what was to be our task on Sunday, he
answered that the rest of the day was our own, and that if I pleased
we would go together and call upon that Maria and her little sister,
of whom I knew all that could be gained out of personal intercourse.

"Just what I wished," said I; "how exactly you guessed it!"

"Oh, but I wanted to go myself!" answered Franz, laughing, "for I have
an errand thither;" and together we quitted the church garden, with
its sheltering lime shadow, for the sultry pavement.

It cannot have been five minutes that we walked, before we came in
front of one of those narrowest and tallest of the droll abodes I was
pretty well used to now, since I had lived with Aronach. We went
upstairs, too, in like style to that of the old apprentice home, and
even as there, did not rest until nearly at the top. Delemann knocked
at a door, and, as if perfectly accustomed to do so, walked in without
delay. The room we entered was slightly furnished, but singularly in
keeping with each other were the few ornaments, unsurpassably
effective. Also a light clearness threw up and out each decoration
from the delicate hue of the walls and the mild fresco of their
borders, unlike anything I had yet seen, and startling, in spite of
the simplicity of the actual accommodations, from their excelling
taste. Upon brackets stood busts, three or four, and a single vase of
such form that it could only have been purchased in Italy. At the
window were a couch and reading-desk, also a table ready prepared with
some kind of noonday meal; and at the opposite end of the apartment
rose from the polished floor the stove itself, entirely concealed
under lime-branches and oak-leaves. The room, too, was not untenanted,
for upon the couch, though making no use whatever of the desk, lay a
gentleman, who was reading, nevertheless, a French newspaper. He was
very fine,--grand-looking, I thought; his dress appeared courtly, so
courtly was his greeting. "You have not come for me, I know," he
observed to Delemann, having seated us; "but the girls, having dined,
are gone to rest: we don't find it easy to dispense with our siesta.
You will surely eat first, for you must be hungry, and I am but just
come in." He was, in fact, waiting for the soup, which swiftly
followed us; and so we sat down together. Franz then produced a little
basket, which I had noticed him to carry very carefully as we came
along; but he did not open it, he placed it by his side upon the
table. It was covered, and the cover was tied down with green ribbon.
I was instantly smitten curious; but a great stay to my curiosity was
the deportment of our host. I had seen a good many musicians by this
time, and found them every one the alone civilized and polished of the
human race; but there were evidences of supremacy in a few that I
detected not even in the superior many. Some had enthralled me more
than this young Cerinthia for I now know he was young, though at that
time he appeared extremely my elder, and I could have believed him
even aged; but there was about him an unassuming nobility that bespoke
the highest of all educations,--that according to the preparations and
purposes of nature. He seemed to live rationally, and I believe he
did, though he was not to the immediate perception large-hearted. He
ate, himself, with the frugality of Ausonia, but pressed us with
cordial attention; and for me, I enjoyed my dinner immensely, though I
had not come there to eat. Franz did not talk to him about his
sisters, as I should have perhaps wished, and I dared not mention
them, for there was that in Cerinthia's hazy, lustrous eyes that made
me afraid to be as audacious as my disposition permitted. Presently,
while we were drinking to each other, I heard little steps in the
passage; and as I expected an apparition, I was not surprised when
there entered upon those light feet a little girl, who, the first
moment reminded me of Laura, but not the next, for her face was unlike
as my own. She was very young, indeed, but had a countenance unusually
formed, though the head was infantine,--like enough to our entertainer
to belong to him, like as to delicacy of extremities and emerald
darkness of eye. She wore a short white frock and two beautiful plaits
of thick bright hair kept and dressed like that of a princess. She
took no notice of me, but courtesyed to Delemann with an alien air
most strange to me, and then ran past him to her brother, whom she
freely caressed, at the same time, as it were, to hide her face. "Look
up! my shy Josephine," said he, "and make another courtesy to that
young gentleman, who is a great friend and connoisseur of the
Chevalier Seraphael." Josephine looked back at me from beneath her
heavy eyelashes, but still did not approach. Then I said, "How is your
sister, Miss Josephine? I am only a little friend of the
Chevalier,--she is the great one."

"I know," replied she, in a sage child's voice, then looking up at her
brother, "Maria is tired, and will not come in here, Joseph."

"She is lying down, then?"

"No, she is brushing her hair." We all laughed at this.

"But run to tell her that Franz Delemann is here, and Carl Auchester
with him; or if you cannot remember this name, Delemann's alone will
do."

"But she knows, for we heard them come in, and she said she should
stay in her room; but that if Mr. Delemann had a letter for her I
might carry it there."

"I don't know whether there is a letter in here, Josephine, but this
basket came for her."

"How pretty!" said Josephine; and she stretched her tiny hand, a smile
just shining over her face that reminded me of her beautiful sister. I
saw she was anxious to possess herself of it, but I could not resist
my own desire to be the bearer.

"Let me take it to her!" I exclaimed impulsively. Cerinthia looked up,
and Franz, too, surprised enough; but I did not care, I rose. "She can
send me back again, if she is angry," I pleaded; and Cerinthia fairly
laughed.

"Oh, you may go! She will not send you back, though I should certainly
be sent back if _I_ took such a liberty."

"Neither would she admit me," said Delemann.

"Why, you came last Sunday," put in little Josephine and then she
looked at me, with one little finger to her lip.

"Come too!"

So we went, she springing before me to a door which she left ajar as
she entered, while I discreetly remained outside.

"May he come, Maria?" I heard her say; and then I heard that other
voice.

"Who, dear little Josephine,--which of them?"

"The little boy."

"The little boy!" she gave a kind of bright cry, and herself came to
the door. She opened it, and standing yet there, said, with the
loveliest manner, "You will not quarrel with this little thing! But
forgive her, and pray come in. It was kind to come all the way up
those stairs, which are steep as the road to fame."

"Is that steep?" I asked, for her style instantly excited me to a
rallying mood.

"Some say so," she replied,--"those who seek it. But come and rest."
And she led me by her flower-soft finger-tips to a sofa, also in the
light, as in the room I had quitted, and bathed in airs that floated
above the gardens, and downwards from the heavens into that window
also open. A curtain was drawn across the alcove at the end, and
between us and its folds of green, standing out most gracefully, was a
beautiful harp; there were also more books than I had seen in a
sitting-room since I left my Davy, and I concluded they had been
retrieved from her lost father's library. But upon the whole room
there was an atmosphere thrown neither from the gleaming harp nor
illustrating volumes; and as my eyes rested upon her, after roving
everywhere else, I could only wonder I had ever looked away. Her very
dress was such as would have become no other, and was that which she
herself invested with its charm. She wore a dark-blue muslin, darker
than the summer heaven, but of the self-same hue; this robe was worn
loosely, was laced in front over a white bodice. Upon those folds was
flung a shawl of some dense rose-color and an oriental texture, and
again over that shady brilliance fell the long hair, velvet-soft, and
darker than the pine-trees in the twilight. The same unearthly hue
slept in the azure-emerald of her divinely moulded eyes, mild and
liquid as orbed stars, and just as superhuman. The hair, thus
loosened, swept over her shoulder into her lap. There was not upon its
stream the merest ripple,--it was straight as long; and had it not
been so fine, must have wearied with its weight a head so small as
hers.

"What magnificent hair you have!" said I.

"It seems I was determined to make of it a spectacle. If I had known
you were coming, I should have put it out of the way; but whenever I
am lazy or tired, I like to play with it. The Chevalier calls it my
rosary."

I was at home directly.

"The Chevalier! Oh! have you seen him since that day?"

"Four, five, six times."

"And I have not seen him once."

"You shall see him eight, nine, ten times. Never mind! He comes to see
me, you know, out of that kindness whose prettiest name is charity."

"Where is he now?" I inquired, impatient of that remark of hers.

"Now? I do not know. He has been away a fortnight, conducting
everywhere. Have you not heard?"

"No,--what?"

"Of the Mer de Glace overture and accompaniments?"

"I have not heard a word."

She took hold of her hair and stroked it impatiently; still, there was
such sweetness in her accent as made me doubt she was angry.

"I told Florimond to tell you. He always forgets those things!"

I looked up inquiringly; there was that in her eye which might be the
light of an unfallen tear.

"But I don't know who you mean."

"I am glad not. How silly I am! Oh, _madre mia_! this hot weather
softens the brain, I do believe,--I should never have done it in the
winter. And all this time I have been wondering what is that basket
upon which Josephine seems to have set her whole soul."

"It is for you," said Josephine.

"Oh," I exclaimed, "how careless I am! Yes, but I do not know who it
comes from. Franz brought it."

"Young Delemann? Oh, thank him, please! I know very well. Here, then,
_piccola, carina_! you shall have to open it. Where are the ivory
scissors?"

"Oh, how exquisite!" I cried; for I knew she meant those tiny fingers.

"Exquisite, is it? It is again from the Chevalier."

"Did he say so? I thought it like him; but you are so like him."

"I well, I believe you are right,--there is a kind of likeness."

She raised her eyes, so full of lustre, that I even longed for the
lids to fall. The brilliant smile, like the most ardent sunlight, had
spread over her whole face. I forgot her strange words in her
unimaginable expression, until she spoke again. All this while the
little one was untwisting the green bands which were passed over and
under the basket. At length the cover was lifted: there were seven or
eight immense peaches. I had thought there must be fruit within, from
the exhaling scent, but still I was surprised. There was no letter.
This disappointed me; but there were fresh leaves at the very bottom.
My chief companion took out these, and laid each peach upon a leaf:
her fingers shone against the downy blush. She presented me with one
after another. "Pray eat them, or as many as you can; I do not eat
fruit to-day, for it is too hot weather, and _she_ must not eat so
many." I instantly began to eat, and made efforts to do even more than
I ought. Josephine carried off her share on a doll's plate. Then her
sister rose and took in a birdcage from outside the window, where it
had hung, but I had not seen it. There was within it a small bird, and
dull enough it looked until she opened the door, when it fluttered to
the bars, hopped out, stood upon a peach, and then, espying me, flew
straight into her bosom. It lay there hidden for some minutes, and she
covered and quite concealed it with her lovely little hand. I said,--

"Is it afraid of me? Shall I go?"

"Oh dear no!" she replied; "it does like you, and is only shy. Do you
never wish to be hidden when you see those you like?"

"I never have yet, but I daresay I shall, now I come to think about
it."

"You certainly will. This silly little creature is not yet quite sure
of us; that is it."

"Where did it come from?"

"It came from under the rye-stacks. He--that is always the Chevalier,
you know--was walking through the rye-fields when the moon was up; the
reapers had all gone home. He heard a small cry withering under the
wheat, and stayed to listen. Most men would not have heard such a weak
cry; no man would have stayed to listen, except one, perhaps, besides.
He put aside all the loose ears, and he found under them--for it could
not move--this wretched lark, with its foot broken,--broken by the
sickle."

There was no quiver of voice or lip as she spoke. I mention this
merely because I am not fond of the mere sentiment almost all women
infuse into the sufferings of inferior creatures, while those with
loftier claims and pains are overlooked. She went on,--

"How do you think he took it up? He spread his handkerchief over the
stubble, and shelled a grain or two, which he placed within reach of
the lark upon the white table-cloth. The lark tried very hard, and
hopped with its best foot to reach the grains, then he drew the four
corners together, and brought it here to me. I thought it would die,
but it has not died; and now it knows me, and has no mind to go away."

"Does it know him?"

"Not only so, but for him alone will it sing. I let it fly one day
when its foot was well; but the next morning I found it outside the
window pecking at its cage-wires, and it said, 'Take me back again, if
you please.'"

"That is like the Chevalier too. But you _are_ like him; I suppose it
is being so much with him."

"And yet I never saw him till the first day I saw you, and you had
seen him long before. I think it must be dead, it is so still."

Hereupon she uncovered the lark's head; it peeped up, and slowly, with
sly scrutiny, hopped back to the peach and began to feed, driving in
its little bill. I wanted to know something now, and my curiosity in
those days had not so much as received a wholesome check, much less a
quietus; and therefore presumptuously demanded,--

"Who was the somebody, Fräulein Cerinthia, that might stop to listen
to a bird's cry besides the Chevalier. You stopped."

"And that is why you wished to know. I had better have said it in the
right place. Did anybody ever tell you you are audacious? It was
Florimond Anastase."

"My master!" and I clapped my hands.

"Mine, sir, if you please."

"But he teaches me the violin."

"And he does not teach me the violin, but is yet my master."

"How, why?"

"I belong to him, or shall."

"Do you mean that you are married to Anastase?"

"Not yet, or I should not be here."

"But you will be?"

"Yes,--that is, if nothing should happen to prevent our being
married."

"You like to be so, I suppose?"

She gazed up and smiled. Her eyes grew liquid as standing dew. "I will
not say you are again audacious, because you are so very innocent. I
do wish it."

"I said _like_, Fräulein Cerinthia."

"You can make a distinction too. Suppose I said, No."

"I should not believe you while you look so."

"And if I said, Yes, I daresay you would not believe me either. Dear
little Carl,--for I must call you little, you are so much less than
I,--do you really think I would marry, loving music as I do, unless I
really loved that which I was to marry more than music?"

So thrilling were her tones in these simple words, of such intensity
her deep glance, with its fringe all quivering now, that I was
alienated at once from her,--the child from the woman; yet could like
a child have wept too, when she bent her head and sobbed. "Could
anything be more beautiful?" I thought; and now, in pausing, my very
memory sobs, heavy laden with pathetic passion. For it was not exactly
sorrow, albeit a very woful bliss. She covered her eyes and gave way a
moment; then sweeping off the tears with one hand, she broke into a
smile. The shower ceased amidst the sunlight, but still the sunlight
served to fling a more peculiar meaning upon the rain-drops,--an iris
lustre beamed around her eyes. I can but recall that ineffable
expression, the April playing over the oriental mould.

"I might have known you would have spoken so, Fräulein Cerinthia," I
responded, at last roused to preternatural comprehension by her words;
"but so few people think in that way about those things."

"You are right, and agree with me, or at least you will one day. But
for that, all would be music here; we should have it all _our own
way_."

"You and the Chevalier. Do you know I had forgotten all about your
music till this very minute?"

"I am very happy to hear that, because it shows we are to be friends."

"We have the best authority to be so," I replied; "and it only seems
too good to be true. I am really, though, mad to hear you sing.
Delemann says there never was in Europe a voice like yours, and that
its only fault is it is so heavenly that it makes one discontented."

"That is one of the divinest mistakes ever made, Carlino."

"The Chevalier calls me Carlomein. I like you to say 'Carlino,' it is
so coaxing."

"You have served me with another of your high authorities, Maestrino.
The Chevalier says I have scarcely a voice at all; it is the way I
sing he likes."

"I did not think it possible. And yet, now I come to consider, I don't
think you look so much like a singer as another sort of musician."

She smiled a little, and looked into her lap, but did not reply. It
struck me that she was too intuitively modest to talk about herself.
But I could not help endeavoring to extort some comment, and I went
on.

"I think you look too much like a composer to be a singer also."

"Perhaps," she whispered.

I took courage. "Don't you mean to be a composer, Fräulein Cerinthia?"

"Carlino, yes. The Chevalier says that to act well is to compose."

"But then," I proceeded hastily, "my sister--at least Mr. Davy--at
least--you don't know who I mean, but it does not matter,--a gentleman
who is very musical told me and my sister that the original purpose of
the drama is defeated in England, and that instead of bringing the
good out of the beautiful, it produces the artificial out of the
false,--those were his very words; he was speaking of the _music_ of
operas, though, I do remember, and perhaps I made some mistake."

"I should think not."

"In England it is very strange, is it not, that good people, really
good people, think the opera a dreadful place to be seen in, and the
theatres worse? My sister used to say it was so very unnatural, and it
seems so."

"I have heard it is so in England,--and really, after all, I don't so
much wonder; and perhaps it is better for those good people you spoke
of to keep away. It is not so necessary for them to go as for us. And
this is it, as I have heard, and you will know how, when I have said
it to you. Music is the soul of the drama, for the highest drama is
the opera,--the highest possible is the soul, of course; and so the
music should be above the other forms, and they the ministers. But
most people put the music at the bottom, and think of it last in this
drama. If the music be high, all rise to it; and the higher it is, the
higher will all rise. So, the dramatic personification passes
naturally into that spiritual height, as the forms of those we love,
and their fleeting actions fraught with grace, dissolve into our
strong perception of the soul we in them love and long for. The lights
and shades of scenery cease to have any meaning in themselves, but
again are drawn upwards into the concentrated performing souls, and so
again pass upwards into the compass of that tonal paradise. But let
the music be degraded or weak, and down it will pull performers,
performance, and intention, crush the ideal, as persons without music
crush _our_ ideal,--have you not felt? All dramatic music is not thus
weak and bad, but much that they use most is vague as well as void. I
am repeating to you, Carlino, the very words of the Chevalier: do not
think they were my own."

"I did, then, think them very like his words, but I see your thoughts
too, for you would say the same. Is there no music to which you would
act, then?"

"Oh, yes! I would act to any music, not because I am vain, but because
I think I could help it upwards a little. Then there is a great deal
for us: we cannot quarrel over Mozart and Cimarosa, neither Gluck nor
Spohr; and there is one, but I need hardly name him, who wrote
'Fidelio.' And the Chevalier says if there needed a proof that the
highest acting is worthy of the highest music, the highest music of
the highest form or outward guise of love in its utmost loveliness,
that opera stands as such. And, further, that all the worst operas,
and ill-repute of them in the world, will not weigh against the
majesty and purity of Beethoven's own character in the opposing
scale."

"Oh! thank you for having such a memory."

"I have a memory in my memory for those things."

"Yes, I know. Does the Chevalier know you are to marry Anastase?"

"No."

I was surprised at this, though she said it so very simply; she looked
serene as that noonday sky, and very soon she went on to say:
"Florimond, my friend, is very young, though I look up to him as no
one else could believe. I am but fifteen, you know, and have yet been
nearly three years betrothed."

"Gracious! you were only a little girl."

"Not much less than now. I don't think you would ever have called me a
little girl, and Florimond says I shall never be a woman. I wished to
tell the Chevalier, thinking he would be so good as to congratulate
me, and hoping for such a blessing; but I have never found myself able
to bring it out of my lips. I always felt it withdraw, as if I had no
reason, and certainly I had no right, to confide my personal affairs
to him. Our intercourse is so different."

"Yes, I should think so. I wonder what you generally talk about."

"Never yet of anything but music."

"That is strange, because the Chevalier does not usually talk so,--but
of little things, common things he makes so bright; and Franz tells
me, and so did another of our boys, that he only talks of such small
affairs generally, and avoids music."

"So I hear from my brother. He talks to Josephine about her doll. He
did tell me once that with me alone he 'communed music.'"

"Again his words!"

She assented by her flying smile.

"He never plays to you, then?"

"Never to myself; but then, you see, I should never ask him."

"And he would not do it unless he were asked. I understand that. You
feel as I should about asking _you_."

"Me to sing?" she inquired in a tone beguiling, lingering, an echo of
_his_ voice ever sleepless in my brain, or that if sleeping, ever
awoke to music. I nodded.

"No," said she again, with quickness, "I will not wait to be asked."

As she spoke she arose, and those dark streams of hair fell off her
like some shadow from her spirit; she shone upon me in rising,--so
seemed her smile. "Oh!" I cried eagerly, and I caught, by some
impulse, the hem of her garment, "you are going to be so good!"

"If you let me be so," she replied, and drew away those folds, passing
to her harp. Her hand, suddenly thrown upon the wires, whose
resistance to embrace so sweet made all their music, caught the ear
of little Josephine, who had been playing very innocently, for a
prodigy, in the corner; and now she came slowly forwards, her doll in
her arms, and stood about a yard from the harp, again putting up one
finger to her lip, and giving me a glance across the intervening
space. She looked, as she so peered, both singular and interesting in
the blended curiosity and shyness that appertain to certain
childhoods; but it seemed to me at that moment as if she were a
strayed earthling into some picture of a scene in that unknown which
men call heaven. For the harp and the form which appeared now to have
grown to it--so inseparable are the elements of harmony, so
intuitively they blend in meeting--were not a sight to suggest
anything this side of death. All beauty is the gauge of immortality;
and as I wondered at her utter loveliness, I became calm as
immortality only permits and sanctions when on it our thoughts repose,
for it our affections languish. Her arms still rested behind and
before the strings as she tuned them; still her hair swept that cloud
upon the softness of her cheek, toned the melancholy arch of her brow:
but the deep rose-hues of her now drooping mantle, and the Italian
azure of her robe, did not retrieve the fancy to any earthly
apparition. They seemed but transparent and veil-like media through
which the whiteness of light found way in colors that sheathed an
unendurable naked lustre. I thought not in such words, but such
thoughts were indeed mine; and while I was yet gazing,--dreaming, I
should say, for I ever dream on beauty,--she played some long, low
chords, attenuated golden thwarting threads of sound, and began
forthwith to sing. She sang in German, and her song was a prayer for
rest,--a Sunday song, as little Josephine said afterwards to me. But
it might have been a lay of revenge, of war, or of woe, for all I
heard that the words conveyed, as I could not exist except in the
voice itself, or the spirit of which the voice was formed. I felt then
that it is not in voice, it is not in cunning instrument, that the
thing called music hides; it is the uncreate intelligence of tone that
genius breathes into the created elements of sound. This girl's or
angel's voice was not so sweet as intelligible, not so boundless as
intense. It went straight into the brain, it stirred the soul without
disturbing; the ear was unconscious as it entered that dim gallery,
and rushed through it to the inward sympathetic spirit. The quality of
the voice, too, as much pertained to that peculiar organization as
certain scents pertain to particular flowers. It was as in the open
air, not in the hothouse, that this foreign flower expanded, and
breathed to the sun and wind its secrets. It was what dilettanti call
a contralto voice, but such a contralto, too, that either Nature or
culture permitted the loftiest flights; the soprano touches were vivid
and vibrating as the topmost tones of my violin. While the fragrance
yet fanned my soul, the flower shut up. She ceased singing and came to
me.

"Do you like that little song? It is the Chevalier's."

"A Sunday song," observed Josephine, as I mentioned.

"A Sunday song!" I cried, and started. "I have not heard a word!"

"Oh!" she said, not regretfully, but with excitement, "you must then
hear it again; and Josephine shall sing it, that you may not think of
my voice instead of the song."

I had not time to remonstrate, nor had I the right. The child began
quite composedly, still holding her doll. She had a wonderful voice.
But what have I to do with voices? I mean style. Josephine's voice was
crude as a green whortleberry; its sadness was sour, its strength
harsh; though a voice shrill and small as the cricket's chirp, with
scarcely more music. But she sang divinely; she sang like a cherub
before the Great White Throne.

The manner was her sister's; the fragrance another, a peculiar
wood-like odor, as from moss and evanescent wild-flowers, if I may so
compare, as then it struck me. I listened to the words this while, to
the melody,--the rush of melodies; for in that composer's slightest
effect each part is a separate soul, the counterpoint a subtle, fiery
chain imprisoning the soul in bliss. Ineffable as was that
air,--ineffable as is every air of his,--I longed to be convinced it
had been put together by a _man_. I could not, and I cannot to this
hour, associate anything material with strains of his. When Josephine
concluded, I was about to beg for more; but the other left her harp,
and kissing her little care, brought her with herself to the couch
where she had quitted me. How strange was the sweetness, how sweet the
change in her manner now!

"How pale you look!" said she; "I shall give you some wine. I can feel
for you, if you are delicate in health, for I am so myself; and it is
so sad sometimes."

"No wine, please; I have had wine, and am never the better for it. I
believe I was born pale, and shall never look anything else."

"I like you pale, if it is not that you are delicate."

"I think I am pretty strong; I can work hard, and do."

"Do not!" she said, putting her loveliest hand on my hair, and
turning my face to hers, "do not, _lieber_, work hard,--not too hard."

"And why not? for I am sure you do."

"That is the very reason I would have you not do so. I _must_ work
hard."

"But if you are delicate, Fräulein Cerinthia?"

"God will take care of me; I try to serve him. None have to answer for
themselves as musicians." She suddenly ceased, passed one hand over
her face. She did not stir, but I heard her sigh; she arose, and
looked from the window; she sat down again, as if undecided.

"Can I do anything for you?" I asked.

"No, I want nothing; I am only thinking that it is very troublesome
the person who sent those fruits could not come instead of them. I
ought to have kept it from you, child as you are."

"Child, indeed! why, what are you yourself?"

"Young, very young," she replied, with some passion in her voice; "but
so much older than you are in every sense. I never remember when I did
not feel I had lived a long time."

I was struck by these words, for they often returned upon me
afterwards, and I rose to go, feeling something disturbed at having
wearied her; for she had not the same fresh bloom and unfatigued
brightness as when I entered. She did not detain me, though she said,
"Call me Maria, please; I should like it best,--we are both so young,
you know! We might have been brother and sister." And in this graceful
mood my memory carried her away.




CHAPTER III.


I need not say I looked upon Anastase with very different eyes next
time I crossed his path. He had never so much interested me; he had
never attracted me before,--he attracted me violently now, but not for
his own sake. I watched every movement and gesture,--every intimation
of his being, separable from his musical nature and dissociated from
his playing. He seemed to think me very inattentive on the Monday
morning, though, in fact, I had never been so attentive to him before;
but I did not get on very well with my work. At last he fairly stopped
me, and touched my chin with his bow.

"What are you thinking about this morning, sir?" he inquired, in that
easy voice of his, with that cool air.

I never told a lie in my life, white or black. "Of you, sir," I
replied. With his large eyes on mine, I felt rather scorched, but
still I kept faith with myself. "Of the Fräulein Cerinthia."

"I thought as much. The next Sunday you will remain at home."

"Yes, sir; but that won't prevent my thinking about you and her."

"Exactly; you shall therefore have sufficient time to think about us.
As you have not control enough to fasten your mind on your own
affairs, we must indulge your weakness by giving it plenty of room."

Then he pointed to my page with his bow, and we went on quietly. I
need not say we were alone. After my lesson, just before he proceeded
to the next violin, he spoke again.

"You do not know, perhaps, what test you are about to endure. We shall
have a concert next month, and you will play a first violin with me."

"Sir!" I gasped, "I cannot--I never will!"

"Perhaps you will change your note when you are aware who appointed
you. It is no affair of mine."

"If you mean, sir, that it is the Chevalier who appointed me, I don't
believe it, unless you gave your sanction."

He turned upon me with a short smile,--just the end of one,--and
raised his delicate eyebrows. "Be that as it may, to-night we rehearse
first, in the lesser hall; there will be nobody present but the band.
The Chevalier will hold his own rehearsal the week after next, for
there is a work of his on this occasion,--therefore we shall prepare,
and, I trust, successfully; so that the polishing only will remain for
him."

"Bravo, sir!"

"I hope it will be bravo; but it is no bravo at present," said he, in
dismissing me.

I had never heard Anastase play yet, and was very curious,--I mean, I
had never heard him play consecutively; his exhibitions to us being
confined to short passages we could not surmount,--bar upon bar,
phrase upon phrase, here a little, and there a very little. But now he
must needs bring himself before me, to play out his own inner nature.

I found Delemann in his own place presently,--a round box, like a
diminutive observatory, at the very top of the building, and
communicating only with similar boxes occupied by the brass in
general. I let myself in, for it would have been absurd to knock
amidst the demonstrations of the alto trombone. He was so ardent over
that metallic wonder of his that I had to pluck his sleeve. Even then
he would not leave off, at the risk of splitting that short upper lip
of his by his involuntary smile, until he had finished what lay before
him. It was one great sheet, and I espied at the top the words: "Mer
de Glace,--Ouverture; Seraphael." Madder than ever for a conclusion, I
stopped my ears till he laid down that shining monster and took
occasion to say, "That is what we are to have to-night."

"I know. But how abominable is Anastase not to let me have my part to
practise!"

"Very likely it is not ready. The brass came this morning, and the
strings were to follow. Mine was quite damp when I had it."

We went into rehearsal together, Franz and I. What a different
rehearsal from my first in England! Here we were all instruments.
Franz was obliged to leave me on entering, and soon I beheld him afar
off, at the top of the wooden platform, on whose raised steps we
stood, taking his place by the tenor trombone,--a gentleman of adult
appearance who had a large mouth. I have my own doubts, private and
peculiar, about the superior utility of large mouths, because Franz,
of the two, played best; but that is no matter here.

Our _saal_ was a simple room enough, guiltless of ornament; our
orchestra deal, clear of paint or varnish; our desks the same, but
light as ladies' hand-screens,--this was well, as Anastase, who was
not without his crochet, made us continually change places with each
other, and we had to carry them about. There were wooden benches all
down the _saal_, but nobody sat in them; there was not the glimmer of
a countenance, nor the shine of two eyes. The door-bolts were drawn
inside; there was a great and prevalent awe. The lamps hung over us,
but not lighted; the sun was a long way from bed yet, and so were we.
Anastase kept us at "L'Amour Fugitif" and "Euryanthe,"--I mean, their
respective overtures,--a good while, and was very quiet all the time,
until our emancipation in the "Mer de Glace." His _face_ did not
change even then; but there was a fixity and straightening of the arm,
as if an iron nerve had passed down it suddenly, and he mustered us
still more closely to him and to each other. My stand was next his
own; and, looking here and there, I perceived Iskar among the second
violins, and was stirred up,--for I had not met with him except at
table since I came there.

It is not in my power to describe my own sensations on my first
introduction to Seraphael's orchestral definite creation. Enough to
say that I felt all music besides, albeit precious, albeit
inestimable, to have been but affecting the best and highest portion
of myself, but as exciting to loftier aspirations my constant soul;
but that _his_ creation did indeed not only first affect me beyond all
analysis of feeling, but cause upon me, and through me, a change to
pass,--did first recreate, expurge of all earthly; and then inspire,
surcharged with heavenly hope and holiest ecstasy. That qualitative
heavenly, and this superlative holiest, are alone those which disabuse
of the dread to call what we love best and worship truest by name. No
other words are expressive of that music which alone realizes the
desire of faith,--faith supernal alike with the universal faith of
love.

As first awoke the strange, smooth wind-notes of the opening _adagio_,
the fetterless chains of ice seemed to close around my heart. The
movement had no blandness in its solemnity, and so still and
shiftless was the grouping of the harmonies that a frigidity actual,
as well as ideal, passed over my pores and hushed my pulses. After a
hundred such tense, yet clinging chords, the sustaining calm was
illustrated, not broken, by a serpentine phrase of one lone oboe,
_pianissimo_ over the _piano_ surface, which it crisped not, but on
and above which it breathed like the track of a sunbeam aslant from a
parted cloud. The slightest possible retardation at its close brought
us to the refrain of the simple _adagio_, interrupted again by a rush
of violoncello notes, rapid and low, like some sudden under-current
striving to burst through the frozen sweetness. Then spread wide the
subject as plains upon plains of _water-land_, though the time was
gradually increased. Amplifications of the same harmonies introduced a
fresh accession of violoncelli, and oboi contrasted artfully in
syncopation, till at length the strides of the _accelerando_ gave a
glittering precipitation to the entrance of the second and longest
movement.

Then Anastase turned upon me, and with the first bar we fell into a
tumultuous _presto_. Far beyond all power to analyze as it was just
then, the complete idea embraced me as instantaneously as had the
picturesque chilliness of the first. I have called it tumultuous, but
merely in respect of rhythm; the harmonies were as clear and evolved
as the modulation itself was sharp, keen, unanticipated,
unapproachable. Through every bar reigned that vividly enunciated
ideal, whose expression pertains to the one will alone in any
age,--the ideal that, binding together in suggestive imagery every
form of beauty, symbolizes and represents something beyond them all.

Here over the surge-like, but fast-bound _motivo_--only like those
tossed ice-waves, dead still in their heaped-up crests--were certain
swelling _crescendos_ of a second subject, so unutterably, if vaguely,
sweet that the souls of all deep blue Alp-flowers, the clarity of all
high blue skies, had surely passed into them, and was passing from
them again.

Scarcely is it legitimate to describe what so speaks for itself as
music; yet there are assuredly effects produced by music which may be
treated of to the satisfaction of the initiated.

It was not until the very submerging climax that the playing of
Anastase was recalled to me. Then, amidst long, ringing notes of the
wild horns, and intermittent sighs of the milder wood, swept from the
violins a torrent of coruscant _arpeggi_, and above them all I heard
his tone, keen but solvent, as his bow seemed to divide the very
strings with fire; and I felt as if some spark had fallen upon my
fingers to kindle mine. As soon as it was over, I looked up and
laughed in his face with sheer pleasure; but he made no sign, nor was
there the slightest evidence of the strenuous emotion to which he had
been abandoned,--no flush of cheek nor flash of eye, only the least
possible closer contraction of the slight lips. He did nothing but
find fault, and his authority appeared absolute; for when he
reprimanded Iskar in particular, and called him to account for the
insertion extraordinary of a queer _appogiatura_, which I did not know
he had heard, that evil one came down without a smirk, and minced
forth some apology, instead of setting up his crest, as usual. I was
very thankful at last when the room was cleared, as it was infernally
hot, and I had made up my mind to ask Anastase whether my violin were
really such a good one; for I had not used it before this night.

When no one was left except he and I, I ventured to ask him whether I
could carry anything anywhere for him, to attract his attention.

"Yes," said he, "you may gather up all the parts and lay them together
in that closet," pointing to a wooden box behind the platform; "but do
not put your own away, because you are going to look over it with me."

I did as he directed, and then brought myself back to him. But before
I could begin, he took my fiddle from my arms, and turning it round
and round, demanded, "Where did you get this?" I told him in a few
words its history, or what I imagined to be its history. He looked
rather astonished, but made no comment, and then he began to play to
me. I do not suppose another ever played like him; I may, perhaps,
myself a very little, but I never heard anybody else. The peculiar
strength of his tone I believe never to have been surpassed; the
firmness of his _cantabile_ never equalled; his expression in no case
approached. Santonio's playing dwindled in my mind, for Anastase,
though so young, performed with a pointedness altogether mature; it
was that on which to repose unshifting security for the most ardent
musical interest; yet, with all its solidity, it was not severe even
in the strictest passages. Of all playing I ever heard on my adopted
instrument, and I have heard every first-rate and every medium
performer in Europe, it was the most forceful,--let this term suffice
just here. I said to him when he had finished with me, "How much
fuller your playing is than Santonio's! I thought his wonderful until
I heard yours." But with more gentleness than I had given him credit
for, he responded, laying down my little treasure, "I consider his
playing myself far more wonderful than mine. Mine is not wonderful;
it is a wrong word to use. It is full, because I have studied to make
it the playing of a leader, which must not follow its own vagaries.
Neither does Santonio, who is also a leader, but a finer player than
I,--finer in the sense of delicacy, experience, finish. Now go and eat
your supper, Auchester."

"Sir, I don't want any supper."

"But I do, and I cannot have you here."

I knew he meant he was going to practise,--it was always his supper, I
found; but he had become again unapproachable. I had not gained an
inch nearer ground to him, really, yet. So I retired, and slipped into
the refectory, where Franz was keeping a seat for me.

I was positively afraid to go out the next Sunday, and the next it
rained,--we all stayed in. On the following Wednesday would come our
concert, and by this time I knew that the Chevalier would be
accompanied by certain of his high-born relations. But do not imagine
that we covered for them galleries with cloth and yellow fringe. It
was altogether to me one of my romance days; and, as such, I partook
in the spirit of festivity that stirred abroad. The day before was
even something beyond romance. After dinner we all met in the
garden-house, as we called the pillared alcove, to arrange the
decorations for our hall, which were left entirely to ourselves, at
our united request. About fifty of us were of one mind, and, somehow
or other, I got command of the whole troop,--I am sure I did not mean
to put myself so. I sent out several in different directions to gather
oak-branches and lime-boughs, vine-leaves and evergreens, and then sat
down to weave garlands for the arches among a number more. Having seen
them fairly at work, I went forth myself, and found Maria Cerinthia
at home; she came with me directly, and we made another pilgrimage in
search of roses and myrtles. Josephine went too, and we all three
returned laden from the garden of a sincere patroness down in the
valley beneath the hill, of whom we had asked such alms.

Entering Cecilia, after climbing the slope leisurely, we saw a coach
at the porter's door,--the door where letters and messages were
received, not the grand door of the school, which all day stood open
for the benefit of bustling Cecilians. I thought nothing of this
coach, however, as one often might have seen one there; but while
Maria took back Josephine, I obtained possession of all the flowers
which she had placed in my arms, promising to be with us anon in the
garden-house. Past the professors' rooms I walked; and I have not yet
mentioned the name of Thauch, our nominal superintendent, the
appointed of the Chevalier, who always laughingly declared he had
selected him because he knew nothing about music, to care for us _out_
of music. Thauch sat at the head of the middle table, and we scarcely
saw him otherwise or spoke to him; thus I was astonished, and rather
appalled, to be called upon by him when I reached his room, which was
enclosed, and where he was writing accounts. I was not aware he even
knew my name; but by it he called upon me. "Sir," I said, "what do you
want?" as I did not desire to halt, for fear of crushing up my sweet
fresh roses. He had risen, and was in the doorway, waiting, with true
German deliberation, until I was quite recovered from my
breathlessness; and then he did not answer, but took my shoulders and
pushed me into his parlor, himself leaving the room, and shutting
himself out into the passage.

Shall I ever forget it? For, gasping still, though I had thrown all my
flowers out of my arms, I confronted the bright, old-fashioned,
distinct, yet dream-like faces of two who sat together upon the chairs
behind the door. You will not expect me to say how I felt when I found
they were my own sister Millicent, my own Lenhart Davy, and that they
did not melt away. I suppose I did something,--put out my hands,
perhaps, or turned some strange color which made Davy think I should
faint; for he rose, and coming to me, with his hilarious laugh put his
arms about me and took me to my sister. When once she had kissed me,
and I had felt her soft face and the shape of her lips, and smelled
the scent of an Indian box at home that clung to her silk handkerchief
yet, I cried, and she cried too; but we were both quiet enough about
it,--she I only knew was crying by her cheek pressing wet against
mine. After a few moments so unutterable, I put myself away from her,
and began distinctly to perceive the strangeness of our position.
Millicent, as I examined her, seemed to have grown more a woman than I
remembered; but that may have pertained to her dress, so different
from the style with which I associated her,--the white ribbons and
plain caps under the quaint straw bonnet, and the black-silk spencer.
Now, she wore a mantle of very graceful cut, and the loveliest pink
lining to her delicate fancy hat; this gave to her oval countenance a
blushful clearness that made her look lovely in my eyes. And when I
did speak, what do you think I said? "Oh, Millicent, how odd it is!
Oh, Mr. Davy, how odd you look!"

"Now, Charles," said he, in answer,--and how the English accents
thrilled the tears into my eyes,--"now, Charles, tell me what you mean
by growing so tall and being so self-possessed. You are above my
shoulder, and you have lost all your impudence."

"No, Mr. Davy, I haven't--kiss me!" said I; and I threw my arms about
him, and clung on there till curiosity swelled unconquerable.

"Oh, Mr. Davy, how extraordinary it is of you to come so suddenly,
without telling me! And mother never said the least word about it. Oh,
Millicent, how did you get her to let you come? And, oh," suddenly it
struck me very forcibly, "how very strange you should come with Mr.
Davy! Is anybody ill? No, you would have told me directly, and you
would not be dressed so."

Millicent looked up at Davy with an unwonted expression, a new light
in her eyes, that had ever slept in shade; and he laughed again.

"No, nobody is ill, and she would _not_ be dressed so if I had not
given her that bonnet, for which she scolded me instead of thanking
me,--for it came from Paris."

"Oh!" I exclaimed, and I felt all over bathed in delight. I ran to
Millicent, and whispered into that same bonnet, "Oh, Millicent! are
you married to Mr. Davy?"

She pulled off one of her pale-colored gloves and showed me the left
hand. I saw the ring--oh, how strange I felt,--hot and cold; glad and
sorry; excited, and yet staid! I flew to my first friend and kissed
his hand: "Dear Mr. Davy, I am so glad!"

"I thought you would be, Charles. If I had anticipated any objection
on your part, I should have written to you first!"

"Oh, Mr. Davy!" I cried, laughing, "but why did they not write and
tell me?"

"My dear brother, it was that we wished to spare you all
disappointment."

"You mean I could not have come home. No, I don't think I could, even
for your wedding, Millicent, and yours, Mr. Davy; we have been so busy
lately."

Davy laughed. "Oh, I see what an important person you have become! We
knew it; and it was I who persuaded your mother not to unsettle you. I
did it for the best."

"It was for the best, dearest Charles," said Millicent, looking into
Davy's face as if perfectly at home with it. She had never used to
look into his face at all.

"Oh!" I again exclaimed, suddenly reminded, "what did you wear,
Millicent, to be married in?"

"A white muslin pelisse, Charles, and Miss Benette's beautiful veil."

"Yes; and, Charles," continued Davy, "Millicent gratified us both by
asking Miss Benette to be her bridesmaid."

"And did she come?" I asked, rather eagerly.

"No, Charles; she did not."

"I knew she would not," I thought, though I scarcely knew why.

"But she came, Charles, the night before, and helped them to dress the
table; and so beautiful she made it look that everybody was
astonished,--yet she had only a few garden flowers, and a _very_ few
rare ones."

"But how long have you been married, Mr. Davy? and are you going to
live _here_? What will the class do? Oh, the dear class! Who sits by
Miss Benette now, Mr. Davy?"

He laughed.

"Oh, Charles, if you please, one question at a time! We have been
married one week,--is it not, Millicent?"

She smiled and blushed.

"And I am not going to leave my class,--it is larger now than you
remember it. And I have not left my little house, but I have made one
more room, and we find it quite wide enough to contain us."

"Oh, sir, then you came here for a trip! How delicious! Oh, Millicent,
do you like Germany? Oh, you will see the Chevalier."

"Well, Charles, it is only fair, for we have heard so much about him.
Nothing in your letters but the Chevalier, and the Chevalier, and we
do not even know his name from _you_. Clo says whenever your letters
come, 'I wish he would tell us how he sleeps;' and my mother hopes
that Seraphael is 'a good man,' as you are so fond of him."

"But, Charles," added Davy, with his old earnestness and with a
sparkling eye, "how, then, shall we see him, and where? For I would
walk barefoot through Germany for that end."

"Without any trouble, Mr. Davy, because to-morrow will be our concert,
and he is coming to conduct his new overture,--only his new overture,
mind! He will sit in the hall most part, and you will see him
perfectly."

"My dear, dear Charles," observed Millicent, "it is something strange
to hear you say 'our concert.' How entirely you have fulfilled your
destiny! And shall we hear you play?"

"Yes," I replied, with mock modesty, but in such a state of glowing
pride that it was quite as much as I could do to answer with becoming
indifference. "Yes, I am to play a first violin."

"A first violin, Charles?" said Davy, evidently surprised. "What!
already? Oh, I did not predict wrong! What if I had kept you in my
class? But, Millicent, we must not stay," he added, turning to her;
"we only came to carry Charles away, as we are here on forbidden
ground."

"Not at all, Mr. Davy," I cried, eager to do the honors of Cecilia. "A
great many of them go out to see their friends and have their friends
come to see them; but I had no one until now, you see."

"Yes, but, Charles," replied my sister, "we understand that no
visitors are permitted entrance the day before a concert, and thought
it a wise regulation too. They made an exception in our case because
we came so far, and also because we came to take you away."

"Where are we going, then? Going away?"

"Only to the inn, where we have a bed for you engaged, that we may see
something of you out of study. You must go with us now, for we have
obtained permission."

"Whatever shall I do?"

"What now, Charles?"

"Well, Mr. Davy, you may laugh, but we are to decorate our
concert-hall, and they are waiting for me, I daresay. All those
flowers, too, that you made me throw down, were for garlands. If I
might only go and tell them how it is--"

"See, Charles, there is some one wanting to speak to _you_. I heard a
knock."

I turned, and let in Franz. He could not help glancing at the pink
lining, while he breathlessly whispered, "Do not mind us. Fräulein
Cerinthia is gone to fetch her brother; and while they are at supper,
we shall dress the hall under her directions, and she says you are to
go with your friends."

"That is my sister, Delemann," said I; and then I introduced them,
quite forgetting that Millicent had changed her name, which amused
them immensely after Franz was gone, having gathered up my roses and
taken them off. Then Davy begged me to come directly, and I hurried to
my room and took him with me. How vain I felt to show him my press, my
screen, my portmanteau full of books, and my private bed, my violin,
asleep in its case; and last, not least, his china cup and saucer, in
the little brown box! While I was combing my hair, he stood and
watched me with delight in his charming countenance, not a cloud upon
it.

"Oh, dear Mr. Davy, how exquisite it is that you should be my brother!
I shall never be able to call you anything but Mr. Davy, though."

"You shall call me whatever you please. I shall always like it."

"And, sir, please to tell me, am I tidy,--fit to walk with a bride and
bridegroom?"

"Not half smart enough! Your sister has brought your part of the
wedding ceremony in her only box,--and, let me tell you, Charles, you
are highly favored; for the muslin dresses and laces will suffer in
consequence!"

"I don't believe that, sir," said I, laughing.

"And why not, sir?"

"Because, sir, my sisters would none of them travel about with muslin
dresses if they had only one box."

"They would travel about, as Mrs. Davy does, in black silk," answered
Davy, pursuing me as I ran; but I escaped him, and rejoined Millicent
first, who was waiting for us with all possible patience.

There are a few times of our life--not the glorious eternal days, that
stand alone, but, thank God! many hours which are nothing for us but
pure and passive enjoyment, in which we exist. How exquisitely happy
was I on this evening, for example! The prospect of the morrow so
intensely bright, the present of such tender sweetness! How divine is
Love in all its modifications! How inseparable is it from repose, from
rapture!

As we went along the village and passed the shops, in the freshening
sunbeams, low-shining from the bare blue heaven, I fetched a present
for my brother and sister in the shape of two concert-tickets, which,
contrary to Tedescan custom, were issued for the advantage of any
interested strangers. I put them into Millicent's hand, saying, "You
know I gave you no wedding-gift."

"Yes, Charles, you gave me this," and she looked up at Davy; "I should
never have known him but for you."

"Which means, my love, that I am also to thank Charles for introducing
me to you;" and Davy took off his hat with mock reverence.

"Oh! that won't do, Mr. Davy; for you said you had seen a beautiful
Jewess at our window before you knew who lived in our house; and of
course you would have got in there somehow, at last."

"_Never!_" said Davy, in a manner that convinced me he never would.

"Then I _am_ very glad," said I,--"glad that I ran away one morning.
The Chevalier says that nothing happens accidentally to such as I."

They laughed till they saw how serious I had grown again, and then
smiled at each other. Arrived at our inn, we rested. Will it be
believed that Davy had brought some of his own tea, besides several
other small comforts? This much amused me. After our tea--a real home
tea, which quite choked my unaccustomed faculties at first--Davy put
his wife on the sofa, and with a bright authority there was no
resisting, bade her be still while he fetched my part of the ceremony.
This consisted of half a dozen pairs of beautiful white kid
gloves,--treasures these indeed to a fiddler!--a white silk waistcoat,
a small case of Spanish chocolate, and a large cake, iced and
almonded.

"That was made at home, Charles," said Millicent, "and is exactly like
that we sent to our friends."

In those days it was not old fashion, gentle reader, to send out
bride-cake to one's friends. I need only mention a white favor or two,
and a frosted silver flower, because I reserved the same for Josephine
Cerinthia.




CHAPTER IV.


In my box-bed at that flower-baptized inn, I certainly did not sleep
so well as in my own nest at school. Here it was in a box, as ever in
that country of creation; and in the middle of the night I sat up to
wonder whether my sister and new-found brother thought the _locale_ as
stifling as I did. I was up before the sun, and dressed together with
his arrangement of his beams. We had--in spite of the difficulty to
get served in rational fashion--a right merry breakfast, thanks to the
company and the tea. I had not tasted such, as it appeared to me,
since my infancy.

How Davy did rail against the toilet short-comings,--the meagre,
shallow depths of his basin! And he was not happy until I took him to
my portion (as we called our sleeping-places at Cecilia), and let him
do as he pleased with my own water-magazine. This was an artificial
lake of red ware, which was properly a baking-dish, and which I had
purchased under that name for my private need. If it had not been for
the little river which flowed not half a mile from our school, and
which our Cecilians haunted as a bath through summer, I could not
answer, in my memory's conscience, for their morality if, as I of
course believe, cleanliness be next to godliness.

After breakfast, and after I had taken Davy back, I returned myself
alone to seek Maria and escort her. Davy and Millicent seemed so
utterly indisposed to stir out until it was necessary, and so unfit
for any society but each other's, that I did not hesitate to abscond.
I left them together,--Davy lazier than I had ever seen him, and _she_
more like brilliant evening than unexcited morning. What am I writing?
Is morning ever unexcited to the enthusiast? I think his only repose
is in the magical supervention of the mystery night brings to his
heart.

I was sorry to find that neither Maria, Josephine, nor Joseph was at
home. The way was clear upstairs, but all the doors were locked, as
usual, when they were out; and I went on to Cecilia in a pet. It was
nine when I arrived,--quite restored. Our concert was to be at ten.

What different hours are kept in Germany; what different hearts cull
the honey of the hours! Our dining-hall was full; there was a great
din. Our garden-house was swept and garnished as I remembered it the
day I came with one, but not quite so enticing in its provisions,--that
is to say, there were no strawberries, which had been so interesting
to me on the first occasion. I retreated to the library. No one was
there. I might not go among the girls, whose establishment was apart,
but I knew I should meet them before we had to take our places; and
off I scampered to Franz's observatory. Will it be believed?--he was
still at work, those brass lips embracing his, already dressed, his
white gloves lying on his monster's cradle.

"My dear Delemann," I exclaimed, "for pity's sake, put that down now!"

"My dear Carl, how shall I feel when that moment comes?" pointing to
the up-beat of bar 109, where he first came in upon the field of the
score.

"I don't think you will feel different if you practise half an hour
more, any how."

"Yes, I shall; I want rubbing up. Besides, I have been here since
six."

"Oh, Delemann, you are a good boy! But I don't feel nervous at all."

"You, Carl! No, I should think not. You will have no more
responsibility than the hand of a watch, with that Anastase for the
spring,--works, too, that never want winding up, and that were bought
ready made by our patroness."

"Dear Franz, do come; I am dying to see the hall."

"I don't think it is done. Fräulein Cerinthia went out to get some
white roses for a purpose she held secret. The boughs are all up,
though."

"My dear Franz, you are very matter of fact."

"No, I am not, Carl; the tears ran down my face at rehearsal."

"That was because I made a mouth at you, which you wanted to laugh at,
and dared not."

"Well," said Franz, mock mournfully, "I can do nothing with you here,
so come."

He rolled up his monster and took up his gloves. I had a pair of
Millicent's in my pocket.

"We must not forget to call at the garden-house for a rose to put
here," said Franz, running his slight forefinger into his button-hole.
We accordingly went in there. A good many had preceded us, and rifled
the baskets of roses, pinks, and jasmine, that stood about. While we
were turning over those still left, up came somebody, and whispered
that Anastase was bringing in the Cerinthias. I eagerly gazed,
endeavoring, with my might, to look innocent of so gazing. But I only
beheld, between the pillars, the clear brow and waving robes of my
younger master as he bent so lowly before a maiden raimented in white,
and only as he left her; for he entered not within the alcove. As he
retreated, Maria advanced. She was dressed in white, as I have said;
but so dazzling was her beauty that all eyes were bent upon her. All
the chorus-singers were in white; but who looked the least like her?
With the deep azure of our order folded around her breast, and on that
breast a single full white rose, with that dark hair bound from the
arch of her delicate forehead, she approached and presented us each
also with a single rose, exquisite as her own, from the very little
basket I had carried to her that Sunday, now quite filled with the few
flowers it contained. "They are so fresh," said she, "that they will
not die the whole morning!" And I thought, as I saw her, that nothing
in the whole realm of flowers was so beautiful, or just then so fresh,
as herself!

A very little while now, and our conductor, Zittermayer, the superior
in age of Anastase, but his admirer and sworn ally, came in and
ordered the chorus forwards. They having dispersed, he returned for
ourselves,--the gentry of the band. As soon as I aspired through the
narrow orchestra door, I beheld the same sight in front as from the
other end at the day of my initiation into those sceneries, or very
much the same,--the morning sun, which gleamed amidst the leafy
arches, and in the foreground on many a rosy garland. For over the
seats reserved for the Chevalier and his party, the loveliest flowers,
relieved with myrtle only, hung in rich festoons; and as a keystone to
the curtained entrance below the orchestra, the Cecilia
picture--framed in virgin roses by Maria's hand--showed only less
fair than she. At once did this flower-work form a blooming barrier
between him and the general audience, and illustrate his exclusiveness
by a fair, if fading, symbol.

The hall had begun to fill; and I was getting rather nervous about my
English brother and sister, who could not sit together, however near,
when they entered, and found just the seats I could have chosen for
them. Millicent, at the side of the chamber, was just clear of the
flowery division; for I gesticulated violently at her to take such
place.

I felt so excited then, seeing them down there,--of all persons those
I should have most desired in those very spots,--that I think I should
have burst into tears but for a sudden and fresh diversion. While I
had been watching my sister and brother, a murmur had begun to roll
amidst the gathered throng, and just as the conductor came to the
orchestra steps, at the bottom he arrested himself. The first stroke
of ten had sounded from our little church, and simultaneously with
that stroke the steward, bearing on his wand the blue rosette and
bunch of oak-leaves, threw open the curtain of the archway under us
and ushered into the appropriated space the party for whose arrival we
auspiciously waited. I said Zittermayer arrested himself,--he waited
respectfully until they were seated, and then bowed, but did not
advance to salute them further. They also bowed, and he mounted the
steps.

I was enchanted at the decorum which prevailed at that moment; for, as
it happened, it was a more satisfactory idea of homage than the most
unmitigated applause on the occasion. The perfect stillness also
reigned through Cherubini's overture, not one note of which I heard,
though I played as well as any somnambule, for I need scarcely say I
was looking at that party; and being blessed with a long sight, I saw
as well as it was possible to see all that I required to behold.

First in the line sat a lady, at once so stately and so young looking,
that I could only conjecture she was, as she was, _his_ mother. A
woman was she like, in the outlines of her beauty, to the Medicis and
Colonnas, those queens of historic poesy; unlike in that beauty's
aspect which was beneficent as powerful, though I traced no trait of
semblance between her and her super-terrestrial son. She sat like an
empress, dressed in black, with a superb eye-glass, one star of
diamonds at its rim, in her hand; but still and stately, and unsmiling
as she was, she was ever turned slightly towards him, who, placed by
her side, almost nestled into the sable satin of her raiment. He was
also dressed in black, this day, and held in those exquisite hands a
tiny pair of gloves, which he now swung backwards and forwards in time
to the movement of our orchestra, and then let fall upon the floor;
when that stately mother would stoop and gather them up, and he would
receive them with a flashing smile, to drop them again with
inadvertence, or perhaps to slide into them his slender fingers.
Hardly had I seen and known him before I saw and recognized another
close beside him. If _he_ were small and sylphid, seated by his
majestic mother, how tiny was that delicate satellite of his, who was
nestled as close to his side as he to hers. It was my own, my little
Starwood, so happily attired in a dove-colored dress, half frock, half
coat, trimmed with silver buttons, and holding a huge nosegay in his
morsels of hands. I had scarcely time to notice him after the first
flush of my surprise; but it was impossible to help seeing that my pet
was as happy as he could well be, and that he was quite at home.

Next Starwood was a brilliant little girl with long hair, much less
than he, nursing a great doll exquisitely dressed; and again, nearest
the doll and the doll's mamma, I perceived a lady and a pair of
gentlemen, each of whom, as to size, would have made two Seraphaels.
They were all very attentive, apparently, except the Chevalier; and
though he was still by fits, I knew he was not attending, from the
wandering, wistful gaze, now in the roof, now out at the windows, now
downcast, shadowy, and anon flinging its own brightness over my soul,
like a sunbeam astray from the heavens of Paradise. When at length the
point in the programme, so dearly longed for, was close at hand, he
slid beneath the flowery balustrade, and as noiselessly as in our
English music-hall, he took the stairs, and leaned against the desk
until the moment for taking possession. Then when he entered, still so
inadvertent, the applause broke out, gathering, rolling, prolonging
itself, and dissolving like thunder in the mountains.

I especially enjoyed the fervent shouts of Anastase; his eye as clear
as fire, his strict frame relaxed. Almost before it was over, and as
if to elude further demonstrations, though he bowed with courteous
calmness, Seraphael signed to us to begin. Then, midst the delicious,
yet heart-wringing ice tones, shone out those beaming lineaments; the
same peculiar and almost painful keenness turned upon the sight the
very edge of beauty. Fleeting from cheek to brow, the rosy lightnings,
his very heart's flushes, were as the mantling of a sudden glory.

But of his restless and radiant eyes I could not bear the stressful
brightness, it dimmed my sight; whether dazzled or dissolved, I know
not. And yet,--will it be believed?--affectionate, earnest, and
devoted as was the demeanor of those about me, no countenance
glistened except my own in that atmosphere of bliss. Perhaps I
misjudge; but it appears to me that pure Genius is as unrecognizable
in human form as was pure Divinity. I encroach upon such a subject no
further. To feel, to feel exquisitely, is the lot of very many,--it is
the charm that lends a superstitious joy to fear; but to appreciate
belongs to the few, to the one or two alone here and there,--the
blended passion and understanding that constitute, in its essence,
worship.

I did not wonder half so much at the strong delight of the audience in
the composition. How many there are who _perceive_ art as they
perceive beauty,--perceive the fair in Nature, the pure in
science,--but receive not what these intimate and symbolize; how much
more fail in realizing the Divine ideal, the soul beyond the sight,
the ear!

Here, besides, there were plenty of persons weary with mediocre
impressions, and the effect upon them was as the fresh sea-breeze to
the weakling, or the sight of green fields after trackless deserts. I
never, never can have enough,--is _my_ feeling when that exalted music
overbrims my heart; sensation is trebled; the soul sees double; it is
as if, brooding on the waste of harmony, the spirit met its shadow,
like the swan, and embraced it as itself. I do not know how the
composition went, I was so lost in the author's brightness face to
face; but I never knew anything go ill under his direction. The
sublimity of the last movement, so sudden yet complete in its
conclusion, left the audience in a trance; the spell was not broken
for a minute and a half, and then burst out a tremendous call for a
repeat. But woe to those fools! thought I. It was already too late;
with the mystical modesty of his nature, Seraphael had flown
downstairs, forgetting the time-stick, which he held in his hand
still, and which he carried with him through the archway. As soon as
it was really felt he had departed, a great cry for him was set
up,--all in vain; and a deputation from the orchestra was instructed
to depart and persuade him to return: such things were done in Germany
in those days! Anastase was at the head of this select few, but
returned together with them discomfited; no Seraphael being, as they
asserted, to be found. Anastase announced this fact, in his rare
German, to the impatient audience, not a few of whom were standing
upright on the benches, to the end that they might make more clatter
with their feet than on the firmer floor. As soon as all heard, there
was a great groan, and some stray hisses sounded like the erection of
a rattlesnake or two; but upon second thoughts the people seemed to
think they should be more likely to find him if they dispersed,--though
what they meant to do with him when they came upon him I could not
conjecture, so vulgar did any homage appear as an offering to that
fragrant soul. My dear Millicent and her spouse waited patiently,
though they looked about them with some curiosity, till the crowd grew
thin; and then, as the stately party underneath me made a move and
disappeared through the same curtain that had closed over Seraphael, I
darted downwards past the barrier and climbed the intervening forms to
my sister and brother. Great was my satisfaction to stand there and
chatter with them; but presently Davy suggested our final departure,
and I recollected to have left my fiddle in the orchestra, not even
sheltered by its cradle, but where every dust could insult its face.

"Stay here," I begged them, "and I will run and put it by; I will not
keep you waiting five minutes."

"Fly, my dear boy," cried Davy, "and we will wait until you return,
however long you stay."

I did not _mean_ to stay more than five minutes, nor should I have
delayed, but for my next adventure. When I came to my door, which I
reached in breathless haste, lo! it was fastened within, or at least
would not be pulled open. I was cross, for I was in a hurry, and very
curious too; so I set down my violin, to bang and push against the
door. I had given it a good kick, almost enough to fracture the panel,
when a voice came creeping through that darkness, "Only wait one
little moment, and don't knock me down, please!" I knew that voice,
and stood stoned with delight to the spot, while the bolt slid softly
back in some velvet touch, and the door was opened.

"Oh, sir!" I cried, as I saw the Chevalier, looking at that instant
more like some darling child caught at its pretty mischief than the
commanding soul of myriads, "oh, sir! I beg your pardon. I did not
know you were here."

"I did not suppose so," he answered, laughing brightly. "I came here
because I knew the way, and because I wanted to be out of the way. It
is I who ought to beg _thy_ pardon, Carlomein."

"Oh, sir! to think of your coming into my room,--I shall always like
to think you came. But if I had only known you were here, I would not
have interrupted you."

"And I, had I known thou wouldst come, should not have bolted thy
door. But I was afraid of Anastase, Carlomein."

"Afraid of Anastase, sir,--of _Anastase_?" I could find no other
words.

"Yes, I am of Anastase even a little afraid."

"Oh, sir! don't you like him?" I exclaimed; for I remembered Maria's
secret.

"My child," said the Chevalier, "he is as near an angel as artist can
be,--a ministering spirit; but yet I tell thee, I fear before him. He
is so still, severe, and perfect."

"Perfect! perfect before _you_!"

I could have cried; but a restraining spell was on my soul,--a spell I
could not resist nor appreciate, but in whose after revelation the
reason shone clear of that strange, unwonted expression in Seraphael's
words. Thus, instead, I went on, "Sir, I understand why you came here,
that they might not persecute you,--and I don't wonder, for they are
dreadfully noisy; but, sir, they did not mean to be rude."

"It is I who have been rude, if it were such a thing at all; but it is
not. And now let me ask after what I have not forgotten,--thy health."

"Sir, I am very well, I thank you. And you, sir?"

"I never was so well, thank God! And yet, Carlomein, thy cheek is
thinner."

"Oh! that is only because I grow so tall. My sister, who is just come
from England--" Here I suddenly arrested myself, for my unaddress
stared me in the face. He just laid his little hand on my hair, and
smiled inquiringly, "Oh! tell me about thy sister."

"Sir, she said I looked so very well."

"That's good. But about her,--is she young and pretty?"

"Sir, she is a very darling sister to me, but not pretty at all,--only
very interesting; and she is very young to be married."

"She is married, then?" He smiled still more inquiringly.

"Yes, sir, she is married to Mr. Davy, my musical godfather."

"I remember; and this Mr. Davy, is he here too?" He left off speaking,
and sat upon the side of my bed, tucking up one foot like a little
boy.

"Yes, sir."

"And now, I shall ask thee a favor."

"What is that, sir?"

"That thou wilt let me see her and speak to her; I want to tell her
what a brother she has. Not only so, to invite her--do not be shy,
Carlomein--to my birthday feast."

"Oh, sir!" I exclaimed; and regardless of his presence, I threw myself
into the very length of my bed and covered my face.

"Now, if _thou_ wilt come to my feast, is another question. I have not
reached that yet."

"But please to reach it, sir!" I cried, rendered doubly audacious by
joy.

"But thou wilt have some trouble in coming,--shalt thou be afraid? Not
only to dance and eat sugar-plums."

"It is all the better, sir, if I have something to do; I am never so
well as then."

"But thy sister must come to see thee. She must not meddle, nor the
godpapa either."

"Oh! sir, Mr. Davy could not meddle, and he would rather stay with
Millicent,--but he does sing so beautifully."

He made no answer, but with wayward grace he started up.

"I think they are all gone. Cannot we now go? I am afraid of losing my
_queen_."

"Sir, who is she?"

"Cannot it be imagined by thee?"

"Well, sir, I only know of _one_."

"Thou art right. A queen is only _one_, just like any other lady.
Come, say thou the name; it is a virgin name, and stills the heart
like solitude."

"I don't think that does still."

"Ah! thou hast found that too!"

"Sir, you said you wished to go."

He opened the door, the lock of which he had played with as he stood,
and I ran out first.

The pavilion was crowded. "Oh, dear!" said Seraphael, a little piqued,
"it's exceedingly hot. Canst thou contrive to find thy friends in all
this fuss? I cannot find _mine_."

"Sir, my brother and sister were to wait for me in the concert-hall;
they cannot come here, you know, sir. If I knew your friends, I think
I could find them, even in this crowd."

"No," answered the Chevalier, decisively, as he cast his brilliant
eyes once round the room, "I know they are not here. I do not _feel_
them. Carlomein, I am assured they are in the garden. For one thing,
they could not breathe here."

"Let us go to them to the garden."

He made way instantly, gliding through the assembly, so that they
scarcely turned a head. We were soon on the grass,--so fresh after the
autumn rains. Crossing that green, we entered the lime-walk. The first
person I saw was Anastase. He was walking lonely, and looking down, as
he rarely appeared. So abstracted, indeed, was he that we might have
walked over him if Seraphael had not forced me by a touch to pause,
and waited until he should approach to our hand.

"See," said the Chevalier gleefully, "how solemn he is! No strange
thing, Carlomein, that I should be afraid of him. I wonder what he is
thinking of! He has quite a countenance for a picture."

But Anastase had reached us before I had time to say, as I intended,
"I know of what he is thinking."

He arrested himself suddenly, with a grace that charmed from his cool
demeanor, and swept off his cap involuntarily. Holding it in his hand,
and raising his serious gaze, he seemed waiting for the voice of the
Chevalier. But, to my surprise, he had to wait several moments, during
which they both regarded each other. At last Seraphael fairly laughed.

"Do you know, I had forgotten what I had to say, in contemplating you?
It is what I call a musical phiz, yours."

Anastase smiled slightly, and then shut up his lips; but a sort of
flush tinged his cheeks, I thought.

"Perhaps, Auchester, you can remind the Chevalier Seraphael."

I was so irritated at this observation that I kicked the gravel and
dust, but did not trust myself to speak.

"Oh!" exclaimed Seraphael, quickly, "it was to request of you a
favor,--a favor I should not dare to ask you unless I had heard what I
heard to-day, and seen what I saw."

It might have been my fancy, but it struck me that the tones were
singularly at variance with the words here. A suppressed disdain
breathed underneath his accent.

"Sir," returned Anastase, with scarcely more warmth, "it is impossible
but that I shall be ready to grant any favor in my power. I rejoice to
learn that such a thing is so. I shall be much indebted if you can
explain it to me at once, as I have to carry a message from Spoda to
the Fräulein Cerinthia."

Spoda was Maria's master for the voice.

"Let us turn back, then," exclaimed Seraphael, adroitly. "I will walk
with you wherever you may be going, and tell you on the way."
Seraphael's "I will" was irresistible, even to Anastase.

I suddenly remembered my relations, who would imagine I had gone to a
star on speculation. It was too bad of me to have left them all that
time. My impression that Seraphael had to treat at some length with my
master, induced me to say, "Sir, I have left my brother and sister
ever so long; I must run to them, I think."

"Run, then," said the Chevalier; "thou certainly shouldst, and tell
them what detained thee. But return to me, and bring them with thee."

I conceived this could not be done, and said so.

"I will come to thee, then, in perhaps half an hour. But if thou canst
not wait so long, go home with thy dear friends, and I will write thee
a letter."

I would have given something for a letter, it is true; but I secretly
resolved to wait all day rather than not see him instead, and rather
than _they_ should not see him.

I ran off at full speed; and it was not until I reached the sunny lawn
beyond the leafy shade that I looked back. They were both in the
distance, and beneath the flickering limes showed bright and dark as
sunlight crossed the shadow. I watched them to the end of the avenue,
and then raced on. It was well I did so, or I should have missed Davy
and my sister, who, astonished at my prolonged absence, were just
about to institute a search.

"Oh, Millicent!" I cried, as I breathlessly attained a seat in front
of both their faces, "I am so sorry, but I was obliged to go with the
Chevalier." And then I related how I had found him in my room.

They were much edified; and then I got into one of my agonies to know
what they both thought about him. Davy, with his bright smile at
noonday, said in reply to my impassioned queries, "He certainly is,
Charles, the very handsomest person I have ever seen."

"Mr. Davy! Handsome! I am quite sure you are laughing, or you would
never call him handsome."

"Well, I have just given offence to my wife in the same way. It is
very well for me that Millicent does not especially care for what is
handsome."

"But she likes beauty, Mr. Davy; she likes whatever I like; and I know
just exactly how she feels when she looks at your eyes. What very
beautiful eyes yours are, Mr. Davy! Don't you think so, Millicent?"

Davy laughed so very loud that the echoes called back to him again,
and Millicent said,--

"He knows what I think, Charles."

"But you never told me so much, did you, my love?"

"I like to hear you say 'my love' to Millicent, Mr. Davy."

"And I like to say it, Charles."

"And she likes to hear it. Now, Mr. Davy, about 'handsome.' You should
not call him so,--why do you? You did not at the festival."

"Well, Charles, when I saw this wonderful being at the festival, there
was a melancholy in his expression which was, though touching, almost
painful; and I do not see it any longer, but, on the contrary, an
exquisite sprightliness instead. He was also thinner then, and
paler,--no one can wish to see him so pale; but his colour now looks
like the brightest health. He certainly _is_ handsome, Charles."

"Oh, Mr. Davy, I am sorry you think so! But he does look well. I know
what you mean, and I should think that he must be very happy. But
besides that, Mr. Davy, you cannot tell how often his face changes. I
have seen it change and change till I wondered what was coming next. I
suppose, Mr. Davy, it is his forehead you call handsome?"

"It is the brow of genius, and as such requires no crown. Otherwise, I
should say his air is quite royal. Does he teach here, Charles? Surely
not."

"No, Mr. Davy, but he appoints our professors. I suppose you know he
chose my master, Anastase, though he is so young, to be at the head of
all the violins?"

"No, Charles, it is not easy to find out what is done here, without
the walls."

"No, Mr. Davy, nor within them either. I don't know much about the
Chevalier's private life, but I know he is very rich, and has no
Christian name. He has done an immense deal for Cecilia. No one knows
exactly how much, for he won't let it be told; but it is because he is
so rich, I suppose, that he does not give lessons. But he is to
superintend our grand examination next year."

"You told us so in your last letter, Charles," observed Millicent; and
then I was entreated to relate the whole story of my first
introduction to Cecilia, and of the Volkslied, to which I had only
alluded,--for indeed it was not a thing to write about, though of it I
have sadly written!

I was in the heart of my narration, in the middle of the benches, and,
no doubt, making a great noise, when Davy, who was in front, where he
could see the door, motioned me to silence; I very well knew why, and
obeyed him with the best possible grace.

As soon as I decently could, I turned and ran to meet the Chevalier,
who was advancing almost timidly, holding little Starwood in his hand.
The instant Starwood saw me coming, he left his hold and flew into my
arms; in spite of my whispered remonstrances, he _would_ cling to my
neck so fast that I had to present the Chevalier while his arms were
entwined about me. But no circumstance could interfere with even the
slightest effect _he_ was destined to produce. Standing before Davy,
with his little hands folded and his whole face grave, though his eyes
sparkled, he said, "Will you come to my birthday-feast, kind friends?
For we cannot be strangers with this Carl between us. My birthday is
next week, and as I am growing a man, I wish to make the most of it."

"How old, sir, shall you be on your birthday?" I asked, I fear rather
impertinently, but because I could not help it.

"Ten, Carlomein."

"Oh, sir!" we all laughed, Millicent most of all. He looked at her.

"You are a bride, madam, and can readily understand my feelings when I
say it is rather discomposing to step into a new state. Having been a
child so long, I feel it soon becoming a man; but in your case the
trial is even more obvious."

Millicent now blushed with all her might, as well as laughed, Davy, to
relieve her embarrassment taking up the parable.

"And when, sir, and where, will it be our happiness to attend you?"

"At the Glückhaus, not four miles off. It is a queer place which I
bought, because it suited me better than many a new one, for it is
very old; but I have dressed it in new clothes. I shall hope to make
Charles at home some time or other before we welcome you, that he may
make you, too, feel at home."

"It would be difficult, sir, to feel otherwise in your society," said
Davy, with all his countenance on flame.

"I hope we shall find it so together, and that this is only the
beginning of our friendship."

He held out his hand to Millicent, and then to Davy, with the most
perfect adaptation to an English custom considered uncouth in Germany;
Millicent looking as excited as if she were doing her part of the
nuptial ceremony over again. Meantime, for I knew we must part, I
whispered to Starwood,--"So you are happy enough, Star, I should
suppose?"

"Oh, Charles! too happy. My master was very angry, at first, that the
Chevalier carried me away."

"He carried you away, then? I thought as much. And so Aronach was
angry?"

"Only for a little bit, but it didn't matter; for the Chevalier took
me away in his carriage, and said to master, 'I'll send you a rainbow
when the storm is over.' And oh! Charles, I practise four hours at a
time now, and it never tires me in the least. I shall never play like
_him_, but I mean to be his shadow."

I loved my little friend for this.

"Oh, Charles! I am so glad you are coming to his birthday. Oh,
Charles! I wish I could tell you everything all in a minute, but I
can't."

"Never mind about that, for if you are happy, it is all clear to me.
Only one thing, Star. Tell me what I have got to do on this birthday."

"Charles, it's the silver wedding, don't you know?"

"What, is he going to be married?"

"Who, Carlomein? Starwood won't tell!" said the Chevalier, turning
sharply upon me and bending his eyes till he seemed to peep through
the lashes. "He knows all about it, but he won't tell. Wilt thou, my
shadow? By the by, there is a better word in English,--'chum;' but we
must not talk slang, at least not till we grow up. As for thee,
Carlomein, Anastase will enlighten thee, and thou shalt not be blinded
in that operation, I promise thee. 'Tis nothing very tremendous."

"Charles, I think we detain the Chevalier," observed Davy, ever
anxious; and this time I thought so too.

"That would be impossible, after my detaining _you_; but I think I
must find my mother,--she will certainly think I have taken a walk to
the moon. Come, Stern! Or wilt thou leave me in the lurch for that
Carl of thine?"

"Oh! I beg pardon, sir; please let me come too." And I dearly longed
to "come too," when I saw them leave the hall hand in hand.

"Now, Charles, we will carry you off and give you some dinner."

"I don't want any dinner, Mr. Davy; I must go to Anastase."

"I knew he was going to say so!" said Millicent. "But, Charles, duty
calls first; and if you don't dine we shall have you ill."

"I don't know whether I may go to the inn."

"Oh, yes! Lenhart obtained leave of absence at meals for you as long
as we are here."

"Oh! by the by, Millicent, you said you had only come for one week."

"But, Charles, we may never have such another opportunity."

"Yes," added Davy, "I would willingly _starve_ a month or two for the
sake of this feast."

"Bravo, Mr. Davy. But then, Millicent?"

"Oh, Millicent! she shall starve along with me." We all laughed, and
as we walked out of the courtyard into the bright country, he
continued,--

"You know, Charles, I suppose, what is to be done, musically, at this
birthday?"

"No, Mr. Davy, not in the least; and it is because I did not that I
refused my dinner. After dinner, though, I shall go and call on Maria
Cerinthia, and make her tell me."

"A beautiful name, Charles,--is she a favorite of yours?"

"She is the most wonderful person I ever saw or dreamt of, Millicent;
she does treat me very kindly, but she is above all of us except the
Chevalier."

"Is she such a celebrated singer, then?"

"She is only fifteen; but then she seems older than you are, she is so
lofty, and yet so full of lightness."

"A very good description of the Chevalier himself, Charles."

"Yes, Mr. Davy, and the Chevalier, too, treats her in a very high
manner,--I mean as if he held her to be very high."

"Is she at the school too?"

"She only attends for her lessons; she lives in the town with her
brother, who teaches her himself and her little sister. They are
orphans, and so fond of one another."

I was just about to say, "She is to marry Anastase;" but as I had not
received general permission to open out upon the subject, I forbore.
We dined at our little inn, and then, after depositing Davy by the
side of Millicent, who was reposing,--for he tended her like some
choice cutting from the Garden of Eden,--I set out on my special
errand. On mounting the stairs to Maria's room, I took the precaution
to listen; there were no voices to be heard just then, and I knocked,
was admitted, and entered. In the bright chamber I found my dread
young master certainly in the very best company; for Josephine was
half lost in leaning out of the window, and side by side sat Anastase
and Maria. I did not expect to see him in the least, and felt inclined
to effect a retreat, when she, without turning her eyes, which were
shining full upon his face, stretched out both her lovely hands to me:
and Anastase even said. "Do not go, Auchester, for we had, perhaps,
better consult together."

"Yes, oh, yes, there is room here, Carlino; sit by me."

But having spoken thus, she opened not her lips again, and seemed to
wait upon his silence. I took the seat beside her,--she was between
us; and I felt as one feels when one stands in a flower garden in the
dusk of night, for her spiritual presence as fragrance spelled me, and
the mystery of her passion made its outward form as darkness. Her
white dress was still folded round me, and her hair was still
unruffled; but she was leaning back, and I perceived, for the first
time, that his arm was round her. The slender fingers of his listless
hand rested upon the shoulder near me, and they seemed far too much at
ease to trifle even with the glorious hair, silk-drooping its braids
within his reach. _He_ leaned forwards, and looked from one to the
other of us, his blue eyes all tearless and unperturbed; but there was
a stirring blush upon his cheeks, especially the one at her side, and
so deep it burned that I could but fancy her lips had lately left
their seal upon it,--a rose-leaf kiss. Such a whirl of excitement this
fancy raised around me (I hope I was not preternatural either) that I
could scarcely attend to what was going on.

"The Chevalier Seraphael," said Anastase, in his stilly voice, "has
been writing a two-act piece to perform at his birth-night feast,[4]
which is in honor, not so much of his own nativity, as of his parents
arriving just that day at the twenty-fifth anniversary of their
nuptials. He was born in the fifth year of their marriage, and upon
their marriage-day. We have not too much time to work (but a week), as
I made bold to tell him; but it appears this little work suggested
itself to him suddenly,--in his sleep, as he says. It is a fairy
libretto, and I should imagine of first-rate attraction. This is the
score; and as it is only in manuscript, I need not say all our care is
required to preserve it just as it now is. Your part, Auchester, will
be sufficiently obvious when you look it over with the Fräulein
Cerinthia, as she is good enough to permit you to do so; but you had
better not look at it at all until that time."

"But, sir, she can't undertake to perfect me in the fiddle part, can
she?"

"She could, I have no doubt, were it necessary," said Anastase, not
satirically, but seriously; "but it just happens you are not to play."

"Not to play! Then what on earth am I to do? Sing?"

"Just so,--sing."

"Oh, how exquisite! but I have not sung for ever so long. In a chorus,
I suppose, sir?"

"By no means. You see, Auchester, _I_ don't know your vocal powers,
and may not do you justice; but the Chevalier is pleased to prefer
them to all others for this special part."

"But I never sang to him."

"He has a prepossession, I suppose. At all events, it will be rather a
ticklish position for you, as you are to exhibit yourself and your
voice in counterpart to the person who takes the precedence of all
others in songful and personal gifts."

"Sir,"--I was astonished, for his still voice thrilled with the
slightest tremble, and I knew he meant Maria,--"I am not fit to sing
with her, or to stand by her, I know; but I think perhaps I could
manage better than most other people, for most persons would be
thinking of their own voices, and how to set them off against _hers_;
now I shall only think how to keep my voice down, so that hers may
sound above it, and everybody may listen to it, rather than to mine."

Maria looked continually in her lap, but her lips moved. "Will you not
love him, Florimond?" she whispered, and something more; but I only
heard this.

"I could well, Maria, if I had any love left to bestow; but you know
how it is. I am not surprised at Charles's worship."

It was the first time he had called me Charles, and I liked it very
well,--him better than ever.

"I suppose, sir, I _may_ have a look at the score, though?"

"No, you may not," said Maria, "for I don't mean we should use this
copy. I shall write it all out first."

"But that will be useless," answered Anastase; "he made that copy for
us."

"I beg your pardon; I took care to ask him, and he has only written
out the parts for the instruments. He thinks nothing of throwing about
his writing; but it shall be preserved, for all that."

"And how do you mean to achieve this copy?" demanded Anastase. "When
will it be written?"

"It will be ready to-morrow morning."

"Fräulein Cerinthia!" I cried, aghast, "you are not going to sit up
all night?"

"No, she is not," returned Anastase, coolly; and he left the sofa and
walked to the table in the window where it lay,--a green-bound oblong
volume of no slight thickness. "I take this home with me, Maria; and
you will not see it until to-morrow at recreation time, when I will
arrange for Auchester to join you, and you shall do what you can
together."

"Thanks, sir! but surely you won't sit up all night?"

"No, I shall not, nor will a copy be made. In the first place, it will
not be proper to make a copy. Leave has not been given, and it cannot
be thought of without leave,--did you not know that, Maria? No, I
shall not sit up; I am too well off, and far too selfish, too
considerate perhaps, besides, to wish to be ill."

Maria bore this as if she were thinking of something else,--namely,
Florimond's forehead, on which she had fixed her eyes; and truly, as
he stood in the full light which so few contours pass into without
detriment, it looked like lambent pearl beneath the golden shadow of
his calm brown hair.

My hand was on the back of the sofa; she caught it suddenly in her own
and pressed it, as if stirred to commotion by agony of bliss; and at
the same moment, yet looking on him, she said, "I wonder whether the
Chevalier had so many fine reasons when he chose somebody to
administer the leadership, or whether he did it simply because there
was no better to be had?"

He smiled, still looking at the book, which he had safely imprisoned
between his two arms. "Most likely, in all simplicity. But a leader,
even of an orchestra, under _his_ direction is not a fairy queen."

"Is Herr Anastase to lead the violins, then? How glorious!" I said to
Maria.

"I knew you would say so. What then can go wrong?"

"And now I know what the Chevalier meant when he said, 'I must go find
my queen.' You are to be Titania."

"They say so. You shall hear all to-morrow,--I have not thought about
it, for when Florimond brought me home, I was thinking of something
else."

"He brought you home, then?"

"And told me on the way. But he had to tell me all over again when we
came upstairs."

"But about the rehearsals?"

"We shall rehearse here, in this very room, and also with the
orchestra at a room in the village where the Chevalier will meet us;
for he has his parents staying with him, and they are to know nothing
that is to happen."

"I wish I could begin to study it to-night; I am so dreadfully out of
voice since I had my violin,--I have never sung at all, indeed, except
on Sundays, and then one does not hear one's self sing at all."

"It is of no consequence, for the Chevalier told us your master,
Aronach, told him that your voice was like your violin, but that it
would not do to tell you so, because you might lose it, and your
violin, once gained, you could never lose."

"That is true; but how very kind of him to say so! He need not have
been afraid, though, for all I am so fond of singing. Perhaps he was
afraid of making me vain."

Anastase caught me up quickly. "Carl, do not speak nonsense. No
musicians are vain; no true artists, ever so young: they could no
more be vain than the angels of the Most High!"

"Well said, Florimond!" cried Maria, in a moment. "But it strikes me
that many a false artist, fallen-angel like, indulges in that
propensity; so that it is best to guard against the possibility of
being suspected, by announcing, with free tongues, the pride we have
in our art."

"That is better to be announced by free fingers, or a voice like
thine, than by tongues, however free; for even the false prophet can
prate of truth."

I perceived now the turn they were taking; so I said, "And do miracles
in the name of music too, sir, can't they?--like Marc Iskar, who, I
know, is not a true artist, for all that."

Anastase raised his brows. "True artists avoid personalities: that is
the reason why we should use our hands instead of our tongues. Play a
false artist down by the interpretation of true music; but never
cavil, out of music, about what is false and true."

"Florimond, that is worthy to be your creed! You have mastery; we are
only children."

"And children always chatter,--I remember that; but it is, perhaps,
scarcely fair to blame those who own the power of expression for using
it, when we feel our own tongue cleave to the roof of our mouth."

"So generous, too!" I thought; and the thought fastened on me. I felt
more than ever satisfied that all should remain as it was between
them.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] Mendelssohn wrote the "Son and Stranger" in 1829 for the silver
wedding of his parents.




CHAPTER V.[5]


The day had come, the evening,--an early evening; for entertainments
are early in Germany, or were so in my German days. The band had
preceded us, and we four drove alone,--Maria, shrouded in her
mantilla, which she had never abandoned, little Josephine, Anastase,
and myself. Lumberingly enough under any other circumstances; on this
occasion as if in an aërial car. Dark glitter fell from pine-groves,
the sun called out the green fields, the wild flowers looked
enchanted; but for quite two hours we met no one, and saw nothing that
reminded us of our destination. At length, issuing from a valley
haunted by the oldest trees, and opening upon the freest upland, we
beheld an ancient house all gabled, pine-darkened also from behind,
but with torrents of flowers in front sweeping its windows and
trailing heavily upon the stone of the illustrated gateway. A new-made
lawn, itself more moss than grass, was also islanded with flowers in a
thick mosaic: almost English in taste and keeping was this
garden-land. I had expected something of the kind from the allusion of
the Chevalier; but it was evident much had been done,--more than any
could have done but himself to mask in such loveliness that gray
seclusion. The gateway was already studded with bright-hued lamps
unlighted, hung among the swinging garlands; and as we entered we were
smitten through and through with the festal fragrance. In the
entrance-hall I grew bewildered, and only desired to keep as near to
Anastase and Maria as possible. Here we were left a few minutes, as it
were, alone; and while I was expecting a special retainer to lead us
again thence, as in England, the curtain of a somewhat obscure
gateway, at the end of the space, was thrust aside, and a little hand
beckoned us instantaneously forward. Forward we all flew, and I was
the first to sunder the folded damask and stand clear of the mystery.
As I passed beneath it, and felt who stood so near me, I was subdued,
and not the less when I discovered where I stood. It was in a little
theatre, real and sound, but of design rare as if raised within an
Oriental dream. We entered at the side of the stage; before us, tier
above tier, stretched tiny boxes with a single chair in each, and over
each, festooned, a curtain of softest rose-color met another of
softest blue. The central chandelier, as yet unlighted, hung like a
gigantic dewdrop from a grove of oak-branches, and the workmen were
yet nailing long green wreaths from front to front of the nest-like
boxes. Seraphael had been directing, and he led us onward to the
centre of the house.

"How exquisite!"--"How dream-like!"--"How fairy!" broke from one and
another; but I was quite in a maze at present, and in mortal fear of
forgetting my part. The Chevalier, in complete undress, was pale and
restless; still to us all he seemed to cling, passing amidst us
confidingly, as a fearful and shy-smitten child. I thought I
understood this mood, but was not prepared for its sudden alteration;
for he called to some one behind the curtain, and the curtain
rose,--rose upon the empty theatre, with the scenery complete for the
first act. And then the soul of all that scenery, the light of the
fairy life, flashed back into his eyes; elfin-like in his jubilance,
he clapped those little hands. Our satisfaction charmed him. But I
must not anticipate. Letting the curtain again fall, he preceded us to
the back of the scenery; and I will not, because I cannot in
conscience, reveal what took place in that seclusion for artists great
and small,--sacred itself to art, and upon which no one dwells who is
pressing onward to the demonstration, ever so reduced and
concentrated, of art in its highest form.

At seven o'clock the curtain finally rose. It rose upon that tiny
theatre crowded now with clustering faces, upon the chandelier, all
glittering, like a sphere of water with a soul of fire, the lingering
day-beams shut out and shaded by a leaf-like screen. Out of all
precedent the curtain rose, not even on the overture; for as yet not a
note had sounded, since the orchestra was tuned, before the theatre
filled. It rose upon a hedge of mingled green and silver, densely
tangled leafage, and a burst of moon-colorless flowers, veiling every
player from view, and hiding every instrument of the silent throng,
who, with arm and bow uplifted, awaited the magic summons. But by all
the names of magic, how arose that flower-tower in the midst? For
raised above the screen of sylvan symbol was a turret of roots,
entwisted as one sees in old oaks that interlace their gnarled arms,
facing the audience, and also in sight of the orchestra; and this wild
nest was clad with silver lilies twice the size of life, whose
drooping buds made a coronal of the margin where the turret edged into
the air. And in the turret, azure-robed, glitter-winged,--those wings
sweeping the folded lilies as with the lustrous shadow of their
light,--stood our Ariel, the Ariel of our imaginations, the Ariel of
that haunted music, yet unspelled from the silent strings and pipes!

We behind, among the rocks,--those gently painted rocks that faded
into a heavenly distance,--could only glimpse that delicate form,
hovering amidst up-climbing lilies, those silver-shadowy plumes; that
glorious face was shining into the light of the theatre itself, and we
waited for his voice to reassure us. We need not have feared, even
Maria and I. I was quivering and shuddering; but yet she did not sigh,
her confidence was too unshaken, albeit in such a trying position, so
minutely critical to maintain, did author perhaps never appear. In an
instant, as the first soft blaze had broken on the world in front, did
our Ariel raise his wand, no longer _like_ the stem of a lily, but a
lily-stem itself, all set with silver leaves, and whose crowning
blossom sparkled with silver frostwork. He raised it, but not yet
again let it sweep,--descending downwards, on the contrary, he clasped
it in his roseate lilied fingers; and all amidst the great white buds,
that made him shrink to elfin clearness, he began, in a voice that
might have been the soul of that charmed orchestra, to recite the
little prologue, which may thus be rendered into English:

      "A while ago, a long bright while, I dwelt
      In that old Island with my Prospero.
      He gave, not lent, me Freedom, which I fed
      Sometimes on spicy airs that heavenward roll
      From flowers that wing their spirits to the stars,
      And scented shade that droppeth fruit or balm.
      But soon a change smote through me, and I fell
      Weary of stillness in the wide blue day,
      Weary of breathless beauty, where the rose
      Of sunset flushes with no fragrant sigh,
      For that my soul was native with the spheres
      Where music makes an everlasting morn.
      All music in that ancient isle was mine
      That pulsed the air or floated on the calm,--
      Old music veiled in the bemoaning breeze,
      Or whispering kisses to the yearning sea,
      Where foam upblown sprayed with its liquid stars
      My plumes for all their dim cerulean grain.
      From age to age the lonely tones I stored
      In crystal deeps of unheard memory;
      Froze them with virgin cold fast to the cups
      Of wavering lilies; bade the roses bind
      The orbed harmonies in burning rest;
      Thrilled with that dread elixir, dreaming song,
      The veins of violets; made the green gloom
      Of myrtle-leaves hush the sounds intricate;
      Charged the deep cedars with all mourning chords.
      And having wide and far diffused my wealth,--
      Safe garnered, spelled, unknown of reasoning men,--
      I long to summon it, to disenchant
      My most melodious treasure breathless hid
      In bell and blade, in blossom-blush and buds
      And mystic verdure, the soft shade of rest.
      Methinks in this wild wood, this home of flowers,
      My harmonies are clustered; yea, I feel
      The voiceless silence stir with voiceful awe;
      I feel the fanning of a thousand airs
      That will not be repressed, that crave to wake
      In resurrection of tone infinite
      From the tranced beauty, her divinest death.
      Arise, my spirits! wake, my slumbering spells!
      Dawn on the dreamland of these alien dells!"

As the last words died away, pronounced alike with the rest in accents
so peculiar, yet so pure, so soft, yet so unshaken,--he swept the stem
of lilies around his brow. The frosted flower flashed shudderingly
against the lamplight, and with its motion without a pause opened the
overture, as by those words themselves invoked and magically won from
the abyss of sylvan silence. Three long, longing sighs from the unseen
wind instruments, in withering notes, prepared the brain for the rush
of fairy melody that was as the subtlest essences of thought and
fragrance enfranchised. The elfin progression, _prestissimo_, of the
subject, was scarcely realized as the full suggestion dawned of the
leafy shivering it portrayed. The violins, their splendors
concentrated like the rainbows of the dewdrops, seemed but the veiling
voices for that ideal strain to filter through; and yet, when the
horns spoke out, a blaze of golden notes, one felt the deeper glory of
the strings to be more than ever quenchless as they returned to that
ever-pulsing flow. Accumulating in orchestral richness, as if flower
after flower of music were unsheathing to the sun, no words, no
expression self-agonized to caricature, can describe that fairy
overture. I am only reverting to the feeling, the passion it
suggested; not to its existent art and actual interpretation.

Its dissolution not immediate, but at its fullest stream subsiding,
ebbing, seemed, instead of breaking up and scattering the ideal
impression received, to retain it and expand it in itself through
another transition of ecstasy into a musical state beyond. During the
ethereal modulations, by a sudden illumination of the stage, the
scenery behind uncurtained all along, started into light. Still
beneath the leafy cloud, by mystic management, the hidden band
reposed; but before the audience a sylvan dream had spread. The time
was sunset, and upon those hills I spoke of it seemed to blush and
burn, still leaving the foreground distinct in a sort of pearly
shadow. That foreground was masked in verdure, itself precipitous with
descending sides clothed thick with shrubs that lifted their red bells
clear to the crimson beams behind, and shelving into a bed of enormous
leaves of black-green growth such as one sometimes comes upon in the
very core of the forest. Beneath those leaves we nestled, Maria and I.
I can only speak of what I felt and others saw; not of that which any
of us heard. For simultaneously with the blissful modulation into the
keynote of the primeval strain, we began our part side by side unseen.
It was a duet for Titania and Oberon, the alto being mine, the
mezzo-soprano hers; and it was to be treated with the most distant
softness. The excitement had overpassed its crisis with me, and no
calm could have been more trance-like than that of both our voices, so
far fulfilling his aspiration, which conceived for that effect all the
passionless serenity of a nature devoid of pain,--the prerogative of a
fairy life alone.

      "Ariel, we hear thee!
      Slumbering, dreaming, near thee,
      Bursting from control
      As from death the soul,
      From the bud the flower,
      From the will the power;
      Risen, by the spell
      Thou alone canst quell,
      Hear we, Ariel,
      Ariel, we feel thee!
      Music, to reveal thee,
      Drowns, as dawn the night,
      Us in thy delight.
      We, immortal, own
      Thee supreme alone.
      Strongest, in the spell
      Thou canst raise or quell,
      Feel we, Ariel!"

And Maria shook the leaves above her spreading, and waving aside the
broad-green fans, stood out to the audience as a freshly blossomed
idea from the shadows of a poet's dream. For here had music and poetry
met together, here even as righteousness and peace had embraced,
heaven-sent and spiritual; nor was there aught of earth in that fancy
hour. I was nearest her, and supported her with my arm; her floating
scarf, transparent, spangled, fell upon my own rose-hued mantle, which
blushed through its lucid mist. Her hair, trembling with water-like
gems, clothed her to the very knees; her cheek was white as her
streaming robe, but her eye was as a midnight moon, bright yet
lambent; and while she sang she looked at Anastase, as he stood a
little above the others in the band, and appeared to have eyes for his
violin alone. The next movement was a fairy march _pianissimo_,--a
rustling, gathering accompaniment that muffled a measure delicate as
precise: it was as for the marshalling of troops of fairies, who by
the shifting of the scenery appeared clustering to the stems of the
red foxgloves that bent not beneath that fragile weight. And as the
march waned ravishingly, another verse arose for the duet we sang,--

      "Ariel, behold us!
      In thy strains enfold us,
      Minding but that we
      Ministrant may be.
      On thy freak or sport
      Waits our fairy court:
      Mortals cannot tell
      How to cross thy spell,
      Nor we, Ariel!"

And Ariel lifted the lily wand, and silence awaited his reply. Still,
while he spoke in that recitative so singularly contrasting with the
voice of any song, might be heard weird snatches from the veiled
orchestra, as if music fainted from delight of him,--strange sounds,
indeed, now sigh, now sob, that broke against his unfaltering accents,
yet disturbed them not.

      "Friends, royal darlings of mine ancient age,
      Welcome, right welcome, in the realm of sound
      To majesty and honor! Sooth to say
      Long time I languished for your presences
      That nothing save our Music seeks and finds;
      Though Poesy seeks to find and has not met,
      As we, through might of Music, face to face.
      Your potence is my boon; I bid it work
      With mine own spells, in soul-like, eager flame
      To flash about my spirit and make day,
      Till, as in times of old, we shine as one.
      Far in those undulating vales apart
      A castle lifts its glittering ghostly hue,
      In whose calm walls, that years spare tenderly,
      Dwelleth the rival soul of Faërie
      And Music,--one whose very name is spell
      Immutable,--for that fixed name is Love.
      And Love holds yonder his best festal rite
      This evening, when the moontime draweth nigh.
      Twain souls love there, and meet; but not as cleft
      By late long parting--they have met and loved
      Years upon years, since youth; none ever loved
      So long as they unparted, unappalled,
      Save my Titania and her Oberon!
      For twenty-five their one-like summers count
      Since the dim rapture of the bridal dream.
      Such among mortals jubilant they call
      The Silver Wedding,--rare and purer crown
      Than the wreathed myrtle of the marriage morn.
      All that is rare and pure is of our own;
      Our elements mix gladly into joy:
      But chiefly Love is our own atmosphere,
      And chiefly those who love our pensioners
      Remain,--for where unsullied Love remains,
      Doth Faërie consecrate its festal strains."

The curtain fell on the first act as Ariel finished speaking. Again
rising, the scene indeed had changed. The gray castle immediately
fronted the audience, its buttresses glistening in the perfect
moonlight, the full languid orb itself divided by the dark edge of a
tower. The many windows shone ruby with the gleam inside that seemed
ready to pour through the stonework; and on the ground-floor
especially, the radiance was as if sun-lamps blazed within. And midst
the blaze, scarcely softened by the outer silver shine, rose the
exciting, exhilarating burden of an exquisite dance-measure,
brilliant, almost delirious; albeit distance-clouded, as it issued
from another band behind the stage. The long, straight alleys of
moon-bathed lindens to which the waltz-whirlwind floated, parted on
either hand and left a smooth expanse of lawn, now white, heaving like
a moon-kissed sea; and as soon as the measure had passed into its
glad refrain, two little Loves struck from the lime avenues to the
lawn, directly before the ball-room. I call them Loves; but they were
anything but Cupids, for they were mystical little creatures enough,
and in the prevailing moonlight showed like bright birds of blushing
plumage as they each carried a roseate torch of tinted flame that made
their small bodies look much like flame themselves. They were no
others than Josephine and my own Starwood; but it would have been
impossible to recognize them unprepared. As they stood they paused an
instant, and then flung the torches high into the air against the side
of the castle; and as the rose-flame kissed the moonbeams upon the
walls, it was extinguished, but the whole building burst into an
illumination entirely of silver lamps,--calm, not coruscant;
translucent, streaming; itself like concentrated moonshine, or the
light of the very lilies. And with the light that drank up into itself
the rose-radiance, our Ariel with the silvered hedge, the lilies, the
shine, the shimmer, swelled upon the vision in softest swiftness; and
Ariel, leaning upon his nest, seemed listening to the dance symphonies
afar.

Soon a great shout arose,--no elfin call, but a cry of wonder-stricken
earthlings. And then the hall front opened,--a massy portal that
rolled back; and out of the ball-room, amidst the diminishing
dance-song, poured the dancers upon the lawn in ranks, their
fluttering airy dresses passing into the silver light like clouds. And
as they streamed forth, there broke a delicate peal of laughter in
response to the wondering shout, accompanied by the top-notes of the
violins, vividly _piano_; then Ariel arose, and himself addressed the
multitude. Sharp, sweet notes in unison, intermitted this time with
his words, but ceased when he turned to his fairy troop and incited
them to do homage to the name of love. Nor do I even essay to describe
our feats subsequently, which might in their relation tend to
deteriorate from the conviction that the illustrated music was all in
all, not their companion, but their element and creator.

Except that in the last scene, after exhibiting every kind of charm
that can co-exist with scenic transition, the portraits of the father
and mother in whose honor the fairydom had united, appeared framed in
an archway of lilies with their leaves of silver, painted with such
skill that the imagery almost issued from the canvas; and while
Titania and Oberon supported the lustrous framework on either
hand,--themselves all shivering with the silver radiance,--on either
hand, to form a vista from which the gazers caught the picture, rose
trees of giant harebells, all silver,--white as if veined with
moonshine; and the attendant fairies, springing winged from their
roots, shook them until the tremulous silver shudder was, as it were,
itself a sound,--for as they quivered, or seemed to quiver, did the
final chorus in praise of wedded love rise chime upon chime from the
fairy voices and the rapt Elysian orchestra.

"All that's bright must fade." This passionate proverb is trite and
travestied enough, but neither in its interpretation of necessity
irrelevant or grotesque. I do not envy those who would strangle
melancholy as it is born into the soul; and again to quote, though
from a source far higher and less investigated, "There are woes ill
bartered for the garishness of joy." Such troubles we may not christen
in the name of sorrow, for sorrow concerns our personality; and in
these we agonize for others, not a thought of self intrudes,--we only
feel and know that we can do nothing, and are silent.

At this distance of time, with the mists of boyish inexperience upon
my memory of myself, I can only advert to the issues of that evening
as they appeared. As they are, they can only be read where all things
tell, where nothing that has happened shall be in vain, where mystery
is eternal light. How strangely I recall the smothered sound, the
long-repressed shout of rapture, that soared and pierced through the
fallen and folded curtain,--the eminent oblivion of everything but him
for whom it was uttered, or rather kept back. For the music bewitched
them still, and they could no more realize their position in front,
even among the garlanded tiers, than we behind, stumbling into regions
of lampless chaos.

I felt I must faint if I could not retreat, and as instinctively I had
sought for Maria's hand. I found it, and it saved me; for though I
could not hear her speak, I knew she was leading me away. I had closed
my eyes, and when I opened them we were together again in the little
dressing-room that had been devoted to us alone, and in which we had
robed and waited.

"Oh, Carlino!" said Maria, "I hope no one is coming, for I feel I must
cry."

"Do not, pray!" I cried, for her paleness frightened me; "but let me
help you to undress. I can do that, though I could not dress you, as
the Chevalier seemed to think."

For the Chevalier had slyly entered beforehand and had himself
invested her with the glittering costume. I was still in a dream of
those elfin hands as they had sleeked the plumes and soothed the
spangled undulations of the scarf, and I could not bear her to be
denuded of them, they had become so natural now. I had stripped off my
own roseate mantle and all the rest in a moment, and had my own coat
on before she had moved from the chair into which she had flung
herself, or I had considered what was to be done next. I was running
my fingers through my hair, somewhat distraught in fancy, when some
one knocked at the door. I went to it, and beheld, as I expected, our
Ariel,--_unarielized_ yet, except that he had doffed his wings.

"Is she tired?" he whispered softly; "is she very tired?" And without
even looking at me, he passed in and stood before her.

"Thank you for all your goodness!" said he, in the tenderest of all
his voices, no longer cold, but as if fanned by the same fire that had
scorched his delicate cheek to a hectic like the rose fresh open to
the sun.

"And you, sir, oh you!" Maria exclaimed with enthusiasm, lifting her
eyes from all that cloud of hair, as twin sunbeams from the dark of
night. "Oh, your music! your music! it is of all that is the most
divine, and nothing ever has been or shall be to excel it. It breaks
the heart with beauty; it is for the soul that seeks and comprehends
it, all in all. And will you not, as you even promised, reform the
drama?"

"If it yet remains to me, after all is known; that I cannot yet
discern. Infant germ of all my art's dread children, inspiration
demands thee only!" He checked himself; but as naturally as if no
deep, insufferable sentiment had imbued his words, his caressing calm
returned. "I did not come for a compliment, I came to help you; also
to bring you some pretty ice, made in a mould like a little bird in a
little nest. But I will not give it you now, because you are too
warm." He was smiling now, as he glanced downwards at the crystal
plate he held.

"I am not warm," she answered, very indifferently, still with
grateful intention, "and I should like some ice better than anything,
if you are so kind as to give it me."

"Let me feed you, then," was his sweet reply; and she made no
resistance. And he fed her, spoonful by spoonful, presenting her with
morsels so fairy that I felt he prolonged the opportunity vaguely, and
almost wondered why. Before it was over, another knock came,--very
impatient for so cool a hand, as it was that of Anastase himself.
However, there was no exhilaration of manner on his part; one would
not have thought he had just been playing the violin.

"They are all inquiring for you, sir," he said, very respectfully, to
Seraphael; "your name is calling through and through the theatre."

"I daresay," replied the Chevalier lightly, daringly; but he made no
show of moving, though Maria had finished the ice-bird and last straw
of the nest. Then Anastase approached. "That weight of hair will tire
you; let me fasten it up for you, Maria, and then we need detain no
one, for Carl, I see, is ready." A change came upon the Chevalier; as
if ice had passed upon his cheek, he paled, he turned proud to the
very topmost steep of his shadeless brow, he laughed coldly but
airily. "Oh, if that is it, and you want to get rid of us, Carl and I
will go. Come, Carlomein, for we are both of us in the way; but I will
say it is the first time any one ever dared to interfere between the
queen and her chosen consort."

"It would be impossible," said Anastase, with still politeness, "that
you should be in the way,--that is our case, indeed; but Maria, as
_Maria_, would certainly not detain you."

"Maria, as Maria, would have said you are too good, sir, to notice
the least of your servants,--too good to have come and stayed; but,"
she added, looking at Anastase with her most enchanting sweetness, a
smile like love itself, "_he_ will always have it that I am content he
should do everything for me." I was astonished, for nothing, except
the seasonable excitement, could have drawn forth such demonstration
from her before the Chevalier. He was not looking at her, he looked at
me vividly; I could not bear his eyes simultaneously with Maria's
words, he had so allured my own, though I longed to gaze away.

"Come!" he continued, holding his hand to me, "come, Carlomein." I
took his hand. He grasped me as if those elfin fingers were charged
with lightning. I shook and trembled, even outwardly, but he drew me
on with that convulsive pressure never heeding, and holding his head
so high that the curls fell backwards from the forehead. We passed to
the stage. He led me behind the stage--deserted, dim--to another door
behind that, opened by waving drapery, to the garden-land. He led me
in the air, round the outside of the temporary theatre, to the main
front of the house, to the entrance through the hall, swiftly,
silently, up the stairs into the corridor, and so to a chamber I had
never known nor entered. I saw nothing that was in the room, and
generally I see everything. I believe there were books; I felt there
was an organ, and I heard it a long time afterwards. But I was only
conscious this night that then I was with him,--shut up and closed
together with his awful presence, in the travail of presentiment.

He had placed me on a seat, and he sat by me, still holding my hand;
but his own was now relaxed and soft, the fingers cold, as if
benumbed.

"Carlomein," he said, "I have always loved you, as you know; but I
little thought it would be for this."

"How, sir? Why? I am frightened; for you look so strange and speak so
strangely, and I feel as if I were going to die."

"I wish we both were! But do not be frightened. Ah! that is only
excitement, my darling. You will let me call you so to-night?"

"Let you, dear, dearest sir! You have always been my darling. But I am
too weak and young to be of any use to you; and that is why I wish to
die."

"My child, if thou wert strong and manly, how could I confide in thee?
Yet God forgive me if I show this little one too much too early!"

His eyes wore here an expression so divine, so little earthly that I
turned away, still holding his hand, which I bathed in tears that fell
shiveringly from my dull heart like rain from a sultry sky. It was the
tone that pierced me; for I knew not what he meant, or only had a
dream of perceiving _how much_.

"Sir, you could not tell me too much. You have taught me all I know
already, and I don't intend ever to learn of anybody else."

"My child, it is God who taught thee. It is something thou hast to
teach _me_ now."

"Sir, is it anything about myself?" I chose to say so, but did not
think it.

"No; about some one those eyes of thine do love to watch and wait on,
so that sometimes I am almost jealous of thine eyes! But it cannot be
a hardened jealousy while they are so baby-kind."

"It is Maria, then, sir, of course. But they are not babies,--my eyes,
I mean; for they know all about her, and so do I. I know why sometimes
she seems looking through us instead of at us. It is because she is
seeing other eyes in her soul, and our eyes are only just eyes to her,
and nothing else,--you know what I mean, sir?"

I said all this because I had an instinctive dread of his
self-betrayal beyond what was needed. Alas! I had not even curiosity
left. But I was mistaken in him, so far. He leaned forwards, stroked
my hair, and kissed it.

"Whose eyes, then, Carlomein?"

"My master, Anastase, is that person whose eyes I mean."

"Impossible! But I was wrong to ask thee. Assuredly, thou art an
infant, and couldst even make me smile. That is a fancy only. Not
Anastase, my child! Any one but Anastase."

What anguish curled beneath those coaxing tones!

"Sir, I know nothing about it, except that it is true. But that it is
true I _do_ know, for Maria told me so herself; and they will be
married as soon as she is educated." I trembled as I spoke in sore
dismay; for the truth was borne to me that moment in a flash of
misery, and all I could feel was what I was fool enough to say, "Oh
that I were Maria!" He turned to me in an instant; made a sort of
motion with both his arms, like wings, having released the hand I
held. I looked up now, and saw that a more awful paleness--a virgin
shadow appalling as that of death--had fixed his features. I threw
myself into his arms; he was very still, mute, all gentleness. I
kissed the glistening dress, the spangled sleeves. He moved not,
murmured not. At last my tears would flow. They rushed, they scalded;
I called out of the midst of them, and heard that my own voice, child
as I was, fell hollow through my hot lips.

"Oh, let my heart burst! Do let me break my heart!" I sobbed, and a
shiver seemed to spread from my frame to his. He brought me closer to
his breast, and bowed his soft curls till they were wet with my wild
weeping through and through. It heaved not. No passion swelled the
pulses of that heart; still he shivered as if his breath were passing.
In many, many minutes I heard his voice; it was a voice all tremble,
like a harp-string jarred and breaking. "Carlomein, you will ever be
dearer to me than I can say from this night; for you have seen sorrow
no man should have seen, and no woman could have suffered. You know
what I wished; yet perhaps not yet,--how should you? Carlomein, when
you become a man I hope you will love me as you do now when you know
what I do feel, what I do wish. May you never despise suffering for my
sake! May you never suffer as I do! You _only_ could; I know no one
else, poor child! God take you first, before you suffer _so_. You see
the worst of it is, Carlomein, that we need not have suffered at all,
if I had only known it from the beginning. But it is very strange, is
it not?" He spoke as if inviting me to question him.

"What, dearest sir?"

"That she should not love me. How could she help it?"

Of all his words, few as they were indeed, these touched me most. I
felt, indeed, how could she help it? But I was, child as I was, too
wise to say so.

"You see, sir, she could not help loving Anastase!"

"Nor could I help loving her, nor can I; but the sorrow is, Carlomein,
that neither on earth nor in heaven will she wish to be mine."

"Sir, in heaven it won't matter whether she married Anastase or not;
for if she were perfect here, she could but love you, and _there_ she
will be perfect and will understand you, sir."

"Sweet religion, if true. Sweet philosophy,--false as pleasant."

"But, sir, you will not be unhappy, because it is of no use; and
besides, she will find it out, and you would not like that. And you
will not break your heart, sir, because of music."

"I should never break my heart, Carlchen, under any earthly
circumstances." He smiled upon me indifferently; a pure disdain
chiselled every feature in that attitude. "There is now no more to be
said. I need scarcely say, my child, never speak of this. But I _will_
command you to forget it--as I forget--have already forgotten."

He rose, and passed his hand, with weary grace, over the curls that
had fallen forward; and then he took me by the hand and we went out
together, I knew not whither.

I returned that night with my brother and sister to Cecilia. I never
had taken part in a scene so brilliant as the concluding banquet,
which was in the open air, and under shade lamp-fruited; but I knew
nothing that happened to me, was cold all over, and for a time, at
least, laid aside my very consciousness. Millicent was positively
alarmed by my paleness, which she attributed, neither wrongly, to
excitement; and it was in consequence of her suspicion that we retired
very early.

We met no one,--having bowed to the king and queen of the night's
festival,--nor did I behold the Chevalier, except in the distance, as
he glided from table to table to watch that all should fare well at
them, though he never sat himself. Maria was seated by Anastase. I
noticed them, but did not gaze upon them. Their aspect sickened me.
It was well that Millicent believed me ill, for I was thus not obliged
to speak, and she and Davy had it all to themselves on the road.

That time, when she got me to bed, I became strangely affected in a
fashion of my own, and not sleeping at all, was compelled to remain
there day after day for a week, not having the most shadowy notion of
that which was my affection. It was convenient that Davy knew a great
deal about such suffering on his own account, or I might have been
severely tampered with. He would not send for a doctor, as he
understood what was the matter with me; and presently I got right. In
fact, my nerves, ever in my way, were asserting themselves furiously;
and as I needed no physic, I took none, but trusted Davy and kept
quiet.

I heard upon my resuscitation that Maria, Anastase, and Delemann had
all been to inquire after me, and, oh, strange sweetness! also the
Chevalier. It was some satisfaction when Millicent said he was looking
very well and had talked to her for half an hour. This news tended
most to my restoration of anything; and it was not ten days before I
returned to school, my people having left the village the same morning
only.

I saw as much of Anastase as before, now; but I felt as if till now I
had never known him, nor of how infinite importance a finite creature
may become under certain circumstances. In a day or two I had worked
up to the mark sufficiently to permit myself a breath of leisure; and
towards the afternoon I went after Maria, to accompany her home. This
she permitted; but I knew that Anastase would be with her in the
evening, and refused her invitation to enter, for I felt I could not
bear to see them together just then. I entreated her, therefore, to
take a walk with me instead. She hesitated, on account of her
preparation for the morrow; but when I reminded her that Anastase
desired her to walk abroad daily, she assented. "Florimond would be
pleased."

Up the green sides of the hill we wandered, and again into the valley.
It was a mild day, with no rude wind to break the silken thread of
conversation, and I was mad to talk to her. I could hardly tell how to
begin, though I knew what I wanted to find out well enough; but I need
not have been afraid. She was singularly unsuspicious.

"So, Carl," she began herself, "the Chevalier took you into his
room,--his very room where he writes, was it?"

"I don't know," I said, "whether he writes there. I should think he
would write anywhere. But it was stuffed full of books and had an
organ."

"A large organ?"

Heaven help and pardon me! I had not seen anything in the room
specifically; but I drew upon my imagination,--usually a lively spring
enough.

"Oh! yes, a very large organ, with beautiful carving about
it,--cherubs above, with their wings spread, I believe; and the books
bound exquisitely, and set in cabinets."

"What sort of furniture?"

"I don't know. Oh! I think it was dark red, and very rich looking.
Embroidered cloths, too, upon the tables and sofas,--but really I may
be mistaken, because, you see, I was not looking at them."

"No, I should think not. Carnation is his favorite color, you know; he
told me so."

"He tells you everything, I think, Maria."

"Yes, of course he does,--just as one talks to a little child that
asks for stories."

"That is not the reason,--it cannot be. Besides, he always talks about
himself to you, and one never talks about one's self to children."

"Do not you? But, Carl, he chiefly talks to me about music."

"And for that, is he not himself music? But, Maria, I can, telling you
his favorite color, talking about himself as much as if he told you he
had a headache."

"Well, Carl, he did come to me when he had scratched his finger and
ask me to tie it up."

"And did you? Was that since _the_ evening?"

"It was the day before yesterday. He was going to play somewhere. But,
Carl, we shall not hear him play again."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean not until next year. He is going to travel."

"To travel--going away--where--who with?" I was stupid.

"He told us all so the other day,--just before you returned, Carl. He
went through all the class-rooms to bid farewell. I was in the second
singing-room with Spoda and two or three others. He spoke to Spoda,
'Have you any commands for Italy,--any part of Italy? I am going
unexpectedly, or we would have had a concert first; but now we must
wait until May for our concert.' Spoda behaved very well and exhibited
no surprise, only showered forth his _confetti_ speeches about
parting. Then the Chevalier bowed to us who were there and said, 'My
heart will be half here, and I shall hope to find Cecilia upon the
self-same hill,--not a stone wanting.' And then he sighed; but
otherwise he looked exceedingly happy. And who, do you think, is going
with him?"

"His father, I should imagine."

"No; old Aronach, and your little friend,--who, Carl, I suspect, makes
a sort of chevalier of you, from what I hear."

"Yes; he is very fond of me. But, Maria, what is he going away for? Is
he going to be married?"

She smiled with her own peculiar expression,--wayward, yet warm.

"Oh, dear, no! nothing of the kind, I am sure. I cannot fancy the
Chevalier in love even. It seems most absurd."

"I do not think that; he is too lovable not to be loved."

"And that is just why he never will love--to marry, I mean--until he
has tried everything else and pleased himself in every manner."

"Maria, how do you know? And do you think he will marry one day?"

"Carl, I believe there is not anything he will not do; and yet he will
be happy, very happy,--only not as he expects. I am certain the
Chevalier thinks he should find as much in love as in music,--for
himself, I mean. Now, I believe it would be nothing to him in
comparison."

I could scarcely contain myself, I so sincerely felt that she was
mistaken. But I seriously resolved to humor her, lest I should say too
much, or she should say too little.

"Oh, of course! But I don't think he would _expect_ to find more in
love, because he knows how he is loved."

"Not _how_, Carl, only how much."

"But, Maria, I fancy he wants as much love as music; and that is
plenty."

"But, Carl, he makes the music, and we love him in it, just as we
love God in His works; and I cannot conceive of any love being
acceptable to him when it infringed his right as supreme."

"You mean that he is proud."

"So proud that if love came to him without music, I don't think he
would take any notice of it."

I felt as surely as she did, sure of that singular pride, but also
that it was not a fallen pride, and that she could read it not.

"You mean, Maria, that if you and I were not musical,--supposing such
a thing to be possible,--he would not like us nor treat us as he does
now?"

"I know he would not."

"But then it would be impossible for us to be as we are if we were
changed as to music, and we could not love as we do."

"I don't think that has anything to do with it, and indeed I am sure
not. You see, Carl, you make me speak to you openly. I have never done
so before, and I should not, but that you force me to it,--not that I
dislike to speak of it, for I think of nothing else,--but that it
might be troublesome."

Could it be that she was about, in any sense, to open her heart? Mine
felt as if it had collapsed, and would never expand again; but I was
very rejoiced, for many reasons.

"Oh, Maria! if I could hear you talk all day about your own feelings,
I should know really that you cared to be my friend; but I could not
ask you to do so, nor wish, unless you did."

"Carl, if you were not younger than I am I should hesitate, and still
more if, where I came from, we did not become grown up so fast that
our lives seem too quick, too bright! Oh! I have often thought so,
and shall think so again; but I will not now, because I intend to be
very happy. You know, Carl, you cannot understand, though you may
_feel_, what I feel when I think of Florimond. And it is possible you
think him higher than I do, for you do him justice now."

"I suppose I do,--I am very certain that I adore his playing."

"I do not care for his playing, or scarcely. And yet I am aware that
it is the playing of a master, of a musician, and I am proud to say
so. Still, I would rather be that violin than hear it, and endure the
sweet anguish he pours into it than be as I am, so far more divided
from him than it is."

"Maria!"

"But Florimond does not mind my feeling this, or I should not say
it,--on the contrary, he feels the same; and when first Heaven made
him love me, he felt it even then."

"Was that long ago, Maria?"

"It is beginning to be a long time, for it was in the summer that I
was twelve, before my father died. I was in France that summer, and
very miserable, working hard and seeming to do nothing, for my father,
rest his soul! was very severe with me, and petted Josephine,--for
which I thank and praise him, and love her all the better. We were
twenty miles from Paris, and lodged in a cottage whose roof was all
ruins; but it was a dry year, and no harm came,--besides, we had been
brought up like gypsies, and were sometimes taken for them. In the day
I practised my voice and studied Italian or German; then prepared our
dinner, which we ate under a tree in the garden, Josephine and I,
though she was almost a baby then, and slept half her time. One noon
she was asleep upon the grass, and I was playing with the flowers she
had plucked, with no sabots on, for I was very warm, when I heard a
step and peeped behind that tree. I saw a boy, or, as I thought him, a
very wonderful man, putting aside the boughs to look upon me. You have
told me, Carl, how you felt when you first saw the Chevalier; well, it
was a little as I felt when I saw that face, only instead of looking
on, as you did, I was obliged to look away and hide my eyes with my
hand. He was, to my sight, more beautiful than anything I had ever
seen or dreamed about; and therefore I could not look upon him, for I
know I was not thinking about myself. Still, I felt sure he was coming
to speak to me, and so he did; but not for a long time, for he stepped
round the tree and sat down upon the turf just near me, and played
with the sabots and the wild thyme I had played with, and presently
put out his hand to stroke Josephine's hair as it lay in my lap. I
never thought of being angry, or of wondering at him even, for the
longer I had him near me, the better, though I was rather frightened
lest my father should return; but at last he did speak, and when once
he began, there was not soon an end. We talked of all things. I can
remember nothing, but I do know this,--that we never spoke of music,
except that I told how I passed my time, and how my father taught me.
He went away before Josephine awoke, and nobody knew he had come; but
I returned the next day to the place where I had seen him, and again I
found him there. In that country one could do such things, and it was
the hour my father was absent,--for he had other pupils at the houses
of the inhabitants several miles about, and we lived frugally, in
order that he might give us all advantages when we should be old
enough. I saw Florimond every day for a week, and then for a week he
never came. That week I was taken ill,--I could not help it; I was too
young to hide it. And when he came again, I told him I should have
died if he had stayed away. And then he said that he loved me, but
that he was going a journey, and should not for a long time see me
again, but that I was never, never to forget him; and he gave me a bit
of his hair softer than any curl. I gave him, too, my mother's ring,
that I had always kept warm in my bosom; and I never even lamented
that he was departed, because I knew I should be his forever. We had a
long, long talk,--of feelings and fears and mysteries, of the flowers
of heaven and earth, of glory and bliss, of hope and ecstasy. We
poured out our hearts together, and did not even trouble ourselves to
say we loved. I think he was there three hours; but I sent him away
myself, just in time to be quite ready, and not at all in a tremble,
for my father's supper. Papa came home by sunset, much later than
usual, and I tried hard to wake up, but was as a wanderer in sleep,
until he took from his pocket a parcel and gave it me to open. He was
in great good humor to-night, for he had heard of my brother's success
at the Académie; but it was not my brother who sent the parcel, which
contained two tickets for a grand concert in Paris the next morning,
and a little anonymous billet to beg that we would go, I and my
father.

"My father was much flattered, and still more because there was a
handful of gold to pay the expenses of our journey. This settled the
matter; we did go in the diligence that night. I took my best frock
and gloves, and we slept at a grand hotel for once in our lives, and
supped there, and breakfasted the next morning before setting out for
the concert. When I walked into the streets with my father I envied
the ladies their bonnets,--for I had not even my mantilla, it was too
shabby; and I wore alone a wreath of ivy that I had gathered from
under that very tree at home, and I was thinking too seriously of one
only person to wish to see or to be seen. We went into the very best
places, but I thought as I sat down how I must have changed in a short
time; for a little while before I would have almost sold myself to go
to this same concert, and now I did not care. There was a grand vocal
trio first, and then a fantasia for the harp, and then a tenor solo.
But next in the programme came one of Fesca's solos for the violin;
and when I saw the violinist come up into the front, I fell backwards,
and should have swooned had he not begun to play. His tones sustained
me, drew me upwards; it was Florimond,--my Florimond; mine then as
now."

"I thought it would turn out so," I exclaimed, rudely enough. "But,
Maria, when you said music had nothing to do with love, I think you
were mistaken, or that you misunderstood yourself; for though I can't
express it, I am sure that our being musical makes a great difference
in the way we feel, and that though we don't allude to it, it will go
through everything, and make us what we are."

"Perhaps you are right, and, Carl, I should not like to contradict
you; but I know I should have loved Florimond if he had not been a
musician,--if he had been a shoemaker, for instance."

"Yes, because he still might have been musical; and if the music had
remained within him, it might have influenced his feelings even more
than it does now."

"Carl, but I don't love in that way all those who are musical,
therefore why must it be the music that makes me love _him_? What
will you say to me, now, when I tell you I cannot imagine wishing to
marry the Chevalier?"

"Maria!"

"Carl, I could not; it would abase the power of worship in my soul, it
would cloud my idea of heaven, it would crush all my life within me. I
should be transported into a place where the water was all light and I
could not drink, the air was all fire to wither me. I should flee from
myself in him, and in fleeing, die."

Her strange words, so unlike her youth, consumed my doubts as she
pronounced them. I shuddered inwardly, but strove to keep serene.
"Maria, that may be because you had loved when you saw him, and it
would have been impossible for you to be inconstant."

"Carlino, no. You and I are talking of droll things for a girl and a
boy; but I would rather you knew me well, because, perhaps, it will
help you when you grow up to understand some lady better than you
would if I did not speak so openly. Under no circumstances could I
have loved him so as to wish to belong to him in that sense. For,
Carl, though it might have been inconstant, it would not have been
unfaithful to myself if I had seen and loved him better than
Florimond; it might have been that I had not before found out what I
ought to submit my soul to, nor could I have helped it; such things
have happened to many, I daresay,--to many natures, but not to mine;
if I feel once, it is entirely and for always, and I cannot think how
it is that so few women, even of my own race, are so unfixed about
their feelings and have so many fancies. I sometimes believe there is
a reason for my being different, which, if it is true, will make him
sadder than the saddest,--you can guess what I mean?"

"Yes, Maria, but I know there is nothing in it; it is what my mother
would call a morbid presentiment, and I wish she could talk to you
about it. I should think there might be truth in it, but that it
always proves false. My sister had it once, so had my dear brother,
Mr. Davy. I don't believe people have it when they are really going to
die."

"It is not a morbid presentiment, for 'morbid' means 'diseased,' and I
am sure I am not diseased; but my idea is that people who form so fast
cannot live long. I am only fifteen, and I feel as if I had lived
longer than anybody I know."

"Then," said I, laughing, for I felt it was wrong to permit her much
range here, "I shall die soon, Maria."

"No, Carl. You are not formed; you are like an infant,--your heart
tells itself out, one may count its beats and sing songs to them, as
Florimond says; but your brain keeps you back, though it is itself so
forward."

I was utterly puzzled. "I don't understand, Maria."

"But you will, some time. Your brain is burning, busy, always dreaming
and working. The dreams of the brain are often those which play
through the slumbers of the heart. If your heart even awoke, your
brain would still have the upper hand, and would keep down, keep back
your heart. There is no fear for you, Carl, passionate as you are."

"Well, Maria, I must confess it frightens me a little when you talk
so,--first, because you are so young yourself; and secondly, because
if it is all true, how much you must know,--you must know almost more
than you feel; it is too much for a girl to know, or a boy either, and
I would rather know nothing than so very much."

"Carl, all that I know I get from my heart. I am really excessively
ignorant, and can teach and tell of nothing in the world but love.
That is my life and my faith; and when my heart is bathing in the love
that is my own on earth, all earth seems to sink beneath my feet, and
I tremble as if raised to heaven. I feel as if God were behind my joy,
and as if it must be more than every other knowledge to make me feel
so. And when I sing, it is the same,--the music wraps up the love; I
feel it more and more."

"But, Maria, you are so awfully musical."

"Carl, till I knew Florimond I never really sang. I practised, it is
true, and was very sick of failures; but _then_ my voice grew clear
and strong, and I found what it was meant for,--therefore I cannot be
so musical as you are. And I revere you for it, Carl, and prophesy of
you such performances that you can never excel them, however much you
excel."

"Why, Maria, how we used to talk about music together!"

"I did not know you so well then, Carl; but do you suppose that music,
in one sense, is not all to me? I sometimes think when women try to
rise too high, either in their deeds or their desires, that the spirit
which bade them so rise sinks back again beneath the weakness of their
earthly constitution and never appeals again; or else that the spirit,
being too strong, does away with the mortal altogether,--they die, or
rather they live again."

"Do you ever talk in this strange manner to Anastase, Maria,--I mean,
do you tell him you love him better than music?"

"He knows of himself, not but that I have often told him; but you may
imagine how I love him, Carl, when I tell you he loves music better
than me, and yet I would have it so, chiefly for one reason."

"What is that?"

"That if I am taken from him he will still have something to live for
until we meet again."

It is a strange truth that I was unappalled and scarcely touched by
these pathetic hints of hers; in fact, looking at her then, it was as
impossible to associate with her radiant beauty any idea of death as
for any but the most tasteless moralist to attach it to a new-blown
rose-flower with stainless petals. It was a day also of the most
perfect weather, and the suggestion to my mind was that neither the
day nor she--neither the brilliant vault above, nor those transparent
eyes--could ever "change or pass." I was occupied besides in
reflecting upon the mystery that divided the two souls I felt ought
never to have been separated, even _thought_ of, apart. I did not know
then how far she was right in her mystical assertion that the
premature fulness of the brain maintains the heart's first slumber in
its longest unbroken rest.

FOOTNOTE:

[5] The description of the fairy music contained in this chapter
evidently refers to the opera of "The Tempest," which Mendelssohn
contemplated writing in 1846-47. The composer had agreed to write an
opera on this subject for Mr. Lumley, then manager of Her Majesty's
Theatre in London, the principal _rôle_ to be given to Jenny Lind.
After considerable negotiation, M. Scribe, the eminent French adapter,
furnished a libretto, and Mr. Lumley suggested the following
distribution of parts: Prospero, Signor Lablache; Caliban, Herr
Staudigl; Fernando, Signor Gardoni; Miranda, Mademoiselle Lind; Ariel,
left unassigned. Mendelssohn, however, was dissatisfied with the
libretto, which made serious changes in the character of the story and
marred the artistic effects intended by Shakspeare; but M. Scribe
would not listen to his protests, and thus the matter fell through.
Mendelssohn then turned his attention to the legend of the Loreley as
the subject of an opera, but died shortly afterward, leaving it in a
fragmentary condition, wherefore Mr. Lumley substituted Verdi's "I
Masnadieri" for the long-promised "Tempest." It proved a failure,
however. Thus a three-fold fatality attended the "Tempest" episode in
the friendly relations of Mendelssohn and Jenny Lind. The reader who
may be curious to know the details of these interesting negotiations
will find a very complete record of them in the second volume of the
Life of Jenny Lind by Mr. Rockstro and Canon Holland, recently
published, and there for the first time given to the public from
official sources.




CHAPTER VI.


I left her at her house and returned to Cecilia, feeling very lonely,
and as if I ought to be very miserable, but I could not continue it;
for I was, instead of recalling her words, in a mood to recall those
of Clara in our parting conversation. The same age as Maria, with no
less power in her heavenly maidenhood, she came upon me as if I had
seen them together, and watched the strange calm distance of those
unclouded eyes next the transparent fervors of Maria's soul,--that
soul in its self-betrayal so wildly beautiful, so undone with its own
emotion. Clara I remembered as one not to be approached or reached but
by fathoming her crystal intellect; and even then it appeared to me
that there was more passion in her enshrining stillness than in
anything but the music that claimed and owned her. But Maria had
seemed on fire as she had spoken, and even when she spoke not, she
passed into the very heart by sympathy abounding, summer-like. I
little thought how soon, in that respect, her change would come.

There was one, too, whom I saw not again until that change. Over this
leaf of my history I can only glance, for it would be as a sheet of
light unrelieved by any shade or pencilling; suffice it to say that
day by day, in morning's golden dream, at dream-like afternoon, I
studied and soared. I was--after the Chevalier had left, and the
excitement of his possible presence had ceased--blissfully happy
again, and in much the same state as when I lived with Aronach;
certainly I did not expand, as Maria might have said. The advent of
the Chevalier, which was as a king's visit, being delayed until the
spring, I had left off hoping he might appear any fine morning, and my
initiation--"by trance"--went on apace; I was utterly undisturbed.

At Christmas we had a concert,--a concert worthy of the name; and with
all the Christmas heartedness of Germany we dressed our beloved hall
with its evergreens and streamers. Besides, that overture, the "Mer de
Glace," which, even under an inferior conductor, would make its way,
was one of our interpretations; and it appeared to have some effect
upon the whole crew that was not very material, as nothing would do in
our after sledging party, but that all the instruments should be
carried also, and an attempt made to refrigerate the ice-movement over
again, by performing it in the frosty air, upon the frost-spelled
water. I was to have gone to England this year, as arranged; but the
old-fashioned frump, a very hard winter, had laid in great stores of
snow, with great raving winds, and my mother took fright at the idea
of my crossing the water,--besides, it was agreed that as Millicent
and Davy had seen me so lately, I could get on very well as I was
until June.

It was not such a disappointment as it should have been, for I knew
that Clara had gone to London, and that I could not have seen her. She
was making mysterious progress, according to Davy; but I could not get
out all I wanted, for I did not like to ask for it. There was
something, too, in my present mode of life exiling from all
excitement; and it is difficult for me to look back and believe it
anything but the dream of fiction,--still, that is not strange, for
fiction often strikes us as more real than fact.

I had a small letter from Starwood about this time.

"Dearest Carl," he wrote, as he always spoke to me, in English, "I
wish you could see the Chevalier now, how well he looks, and how he
enjoys this beautiful country. We have been to see all the pictures
and the palaces, and all the theatres; we have heard all the cathedral
services, and climbed over all the mountains,--for, Carl, we went also
to Switzerland; and when I saw the 'Mer de Glace,' I thought it was
like that music. _Now_ we are in a villa all marble, not white, but a
soft, pale-gray color, and there are orange-trees upon the grass. All
about are green hills, and behind them hills of blue, and the sky here
is like no other sky, for it is always the same, without clouds, and
yet as dark as our sky at night; but yet at the same time it is day,
and the sun is very clear. The moon and stars are big, but there is
something in the air that makes me always want to cry. It is
melancholy, and a very quiet country,--it seems quite dead after
Germany; but then we do live away from the towns.

"The Chevalier is writing continually, except when he is out, and the
Herr Aronach is very good,--does not notice me much, which I like. His
whole thoughts are upon the Chevalier, I think, and no wonder. Carl, I
am getting on fast with my studies, am learning Italian," etc. There
was more in the little letter; but from such a babe I could not expect
the information I wanted. Maria and her suite--as I always called her
brother Joseph and the little Josephine--had left Cecilia for
Christmas Day, which they were to spend with some acquaintance a few
leagues off, and a friend, too, of Anastase, who, indeed, accompanied
them. On Christmas Eve I was quite alone; for though I had received
many invitations, I had accepted none, and I went over to the old
place where I had lived with Aronach, to see the illuminations in
every house. It was a chilly, elfin time to me; but I got through it,
and sang about the angels in the church next day.

To my miraculous astonishment Maria returned alone, long before
Josephine and her brother, and even without Anastase. He, it appeared,
had gone to Paris to hear a new opera, and also to play at several
places on the road. It was only five days after Christmas that she
came and fetched me from my own room, where I was shut in practising,
to her own home. When she appeared, rolled in furs, I was fain to
suppose her another than herself, produced by the oldest of all old
gentlemen for my edification, and I screamed aloud, for she had
entered without knocking, or I had not heard her. She would not speak
to me then and there, saving only to invite me, and on the road, which
was lightened over with snow, she scarcely spoke more; but arrived on
that floor I was so fond of, and screened by the winter hangings from
the air, while the soft warmth of the stove bade all idea of winter
make away, we sat down together upon the sofa to talk. I inquired why
she had returned so soon.

"Carl," she said, smoothing down her hair, and laying over my knees
the furry cloak, "I am altering very much, I think, or else I have
become a woman too suddenly. I don't care about these things any
longer."

"What things, Maria,--fur mantles, or hair so long that you can tread
upon it?"

"No, Carl. But I forget that I was not talking to you yesterday, nor
yet the day before, nor for many days; and I have been dreaming more
than ever since I saw you."

"What about?"

"Many unknown things,--chiefly how different everything is here from
what it ought to be. Carl, I used to love Christmas and Easter and St.
John's Day; now they are all like so many cast-off children's
pictures. I can have no imagination, I am afraid, or else it is all
drawn away somewhere else. Do you know, Carl, that I came away because
I could not bear to stay with those creatures after Florimond was
gone? Florimond is, like me, a dreamer too; and much as I used to
wonder at his melancholy, it is just now quite clear to me that
nothing else is worth while."

"Anastase melancholy? Well, so he is, except when he is playing; but
then I fancied that was because he is so abstracted, and so bound to
music hand and foot, as well as heart and soul."

"Very well, Carl, you are always right; but my melancholy, and such I
believe his to be, is exquisite pleasure,--too fine a joy to breathe
in, Carl. How people fume themselves about affairs that only last an
hour, and music and joy are forever."

"You have come back to music, Maria; if so, I am not sorry you went
away."

"I never left it, Carl, it left me; but now I know why,--it went to
heaven to bring me a gift out of its eternal treasure, and I believe I
have it. Carl, Carl! my fit of folly has served me in good stead."

"You mean what we talked about before you went, before the Chevalier
went also?"

"Yes, I meant what I said then; but I was very empty, and in an idle
frame. I thought the last spark of music had passed out of me; but
there has come a flame from it at last."

"What do you mean? And what has that to do with your coming back, and
with your being melancholy,--which I cannot believe quite, Maria?"

"Oh, Carl! I am very ignorant, and have read no books; but I am pretty
sure it is said somewhere that melancholy is but the shadow of too
much happiness, thrown by our own spirits upon the sunshine side of
life. I was in that queer mood when I went to Obertheil that if an
angel had walked out of the clouds I should not have taken the trouble
to watch him; Florimond was all and enough. So he is still. But
listen, Carl. On Christmas we were in the large room, before the
table, where the green moss glittered beneath the children's tree, and
there were children of all sizes gazing at the lights. They crowded so
together that Florimond, who was behind, and standing next me, said,
'Come, Maria, you have seen all this before: shall we go upstairs
together?' And we did go out silently, we were not even missed. We
went to the room which Florimond had hired, for it was only a friend's
house, and Florimond is as proud as some one who has not his light
hair. The little window was full of stars; we heard no sound as we
stood there except when the icicles fell from the roof. The window was
open too; but I felt no cold, for he held me in his arms, and I
sheltered him, and he me. We watched the stars so long that they began
to dance below before we spoke. Then Florimond said that the stars
often reminded him how little constancy there was in anything said or
done, for that they ever shone upon that which was forgotten. And I
replied it was well that they did so, for many things happened which
had better be forgotten, or something as unmeaning. He said, then, it
was on that account we held back from expressing, even remotely, what
we felt most. And I asked him whether it might not rather be that
music might maintain its privilege of expressing what it was forbidden
to pronounce or articulate otherwise. Then he suggested that it was
forbidden to an artist to exalt himself in his craft, as he is so fond
of saying, you know, except by means of it, when it asserts itself.
And then I demanded of him that he should make it assert itself; and
after I had tormented him a good while, he fetched out his violin and
played to me a song of the stars.

"And in that wilderness of tone I seemed to fall asleep and dream,--a
dream I have already begun to follow up, and _will_ fulfil. I have
heard it said, Carl, that sometimes great players who are no authors
have given ideas in their random moments to the greatest writers, that
these have reproduced at leisure,--I suppose much as a painter takes
notions from the colored clouds and verdant shadows; but I don't know.
Florimond, who is certainly no writer, has given me an idea for a new
musical poem, and what is more strange, I have half finished it, and
have the whole in my mind."

"Maria! have you actually been writing?" I sprang from the sofa quite
wild, though I merely foresaw some touching memento, in wordless
_Lied_ or _scherzo_ for one-voiced instrument, of a one-hearted theme.

"I have not written a note, Carl,--that remains to be done, and that
is why I came back so soon, to be undisturbed, and to learn of you;
for you know more about these things than I do,--for instance, how to
arrange a score."

"Maria, you are not going to write in score? If so, pray wait until
the Chevalier comes back."

"The Chevalier! as if I should ever plague him about my writing.
Besides, I am most particularly anxious to finish it before any one
knows it is begun."

"But, Maria, what will you do? I never heard of a woman writing in
score except for exercise; and how will you be pleased to hear it
never once?"

"Ah! we shall know about that when it is written."

"Maria, you look very evil,--evil as an elf; but you are pale enough
already. What if this work make you ill?"

"Nothing ever makes us ill that we like to do, only what we like to
have. I acknowledge, Carl, that it might make me ill if this symphony
were to be rehearsed, with a full band, before the Chevalier. But as
nothing of that kind can happen, I shall take my own way."

"A symphony, Maria? The Chevalier says that the symphony is the
highest style of music, and that none can even attempt it but the most
formed, as well as naturally framed musicians."

"I should think I knew that; but it is not in me to attempt any but
the highest effect. I would rather fail there than succeed in an
inferior. The structure of the symphony is quite clear to my
brain,--it always has been so; for I believe I understand it
naturally, though I never knew why until now. Carl, a woman has never
yet dared anything of the kind, and if I wait a few years longer I
must give it up entirely. If I am married, my thoughts will not make
themselves ready, and now they haunt me."

"Maria, do _not_ write! Wait, at least, until Anastase returns, and
ask his own advice."

"Carl, I never knew you cold before,--what is it? As if Florimond
could advise me! Could I advise him how to improve his present method?
and why should I wait? I shall not expose myself; it is for myself
alone."

"Maria, this is the reason. You do look so fixed and strange, even
while you talk about it, that I think you will do yourself some
harm,--that is all; you did not use to look so."

"Am I so frightful, then, Carl?"

"You are too beautiful, Maria; but your eyes seem to have no sleep in
them."

"They have not had, and they will not have until I have completed this
task the angel set me."

"Oh, Maria! you are thinking of the Chevalier."

"I was not; I was thinking of St. Cecilia. If the Chevalier had
ordered me to make a symphony, I should to everlasting have remained
among the dunces."

I often, often lament, most sadly, that I am obliged to form her words
into a foreign mould, almost at times to fuse them with my own
expression; but the words about the angel were exactly her own, and I
have often remembered them bitterly.

"You will find it very hard to write without any prospect of
rehearsal, Maria."

"I can condense it, and so try it over; but I am certain of hearing it
in my head, and that is enough."

"You will not think so still when it is written. How did it first
occur to you?"

"In a moment, as I tell you, Carl, while the violin tones, hot as
stars that are cold in distance, were dropping into my heart. The
subjects rose in Alps before me. I both saw and heard them; there were
vistas of sound, but no torrents; it was all glacier-like,--death
enfolding life."

"What shall you call it, Maria?"

"No name, Carl. Perhaps I shall give it a name when it shall be really
finished; but if it is to be what I expect, no one would remember its
name on hearing it."

"Is it so beautiful, then, Maria?"

"To my fancy, _most_ beautiful, Carl."

"That is like the Chevalier."

"He has written, and knows what he has written; but I do not believe
he has ever felt such satisfaction in any work as I in this."

"I think in any one else it would be dreadfully presumptuous,--in you
it is ambitious, I believe; but I have no fear about your succeeding."

"Thank you, Carl, nor I. Will you stay here with me and help me?"

"No, Maria, for you do not want help, and I should think no one could
write unless alone. But I will prevent any one else from coming."

"No one else will come; but if you care to stay here, Carl, I can
write in my room, and you, as you said you have set yourself certain
tasks, can work in this one. I am very selfish I am afraid, for I feel
pleasantly safe when you are near me. I think, Carl, you must have
been a Sunday-child."

"No, Maria; I was born upon a Friday, and my mother was in a great
fright. Shall you write this evening?"

"I must go out and buy some paper."




CHAPTER VII.


We dined together, and then walked. I cannot record Maria's
conversation, for her force now waned, and I should have had to
entertain myself but for the unutterable entertainment at all times to
me of a walk. She bought enough paper to score a whole opera had she
been so disposed; and her preparations rather scared me on her
account. For me, I returned to Cecilia to inform our powers why I
should absent myself, and where remain; and when I came back with
"books and work" of my own, she was very quietly awaiting me for
supper, certainly not making attempts, either dread or ecstatic, at
present. I was, indeed, anxious that if she accomplished her
intentions at all, it should be in the vacation, as she studied so
ardently at every other time; and it was this anxiety that induced me
to leave her alone the next day and every morning of that week. I knew
nothing of what she did meanwhile, and as I returned to Cecilia every
night for sleep, I left her ever early, and heard not a note of her
progress; whether she made any or not remaining at present a secret.

We reassembled in February. At our first meeting, which was a very
festive banquet, our nominal head and the leading professors gave us
an intimation that the examinations would extend for a month, and
would begin in May, when the results would be communicated to the
Chevalier Seraphael, who would be amongst us again at that time, and
distribute the prizes after his own device, also confer the
certificates upon those who were about to leave the school. I was not,
of course, in this number, as the usual term of probation was three
years in any specific department, and six for the academical
course,--the latter had been advised for me by Davy, and acceded to by
my mother. I gave up at present nearly my whole time to mastering the
mere mechanism of my instrument, and had no notion of trying for any
prize at all. I believe those of my contemporaries who aspired thus
were very few at all, and Marc Iskar being among them had the effect
upon me of quenching the slight fever of a desire I might have had so
to distinguish myself. It struck me that Maria should try for the
reward of successful composition; but she was so hurt, and looked so
white when I alluded to it, that it was only once I did so. As to her
proceedings, whatever they were, the most perfect calm pervaded them,
and also her. I scarcely now heard her voice in speech; though it was
spoken aloud by Spoda, and no longer whispered, that she would very
soon be fit for the next initiation into a stage career, or its
attendant and inductive mysteries. One evening I went to see her
expressly to ascertain whether she would really leave us, and I asked
her also about her intentions.

"Carl," she said, "I wish I had any. I don't really care what they do
with me, though I wish to be able to marry as soon as possible. I
believe I am to study under Mademoiselle Venelli at Berlin when I
leave Cecilia. She teaches declamation and that style."

"Maria, you are very cool about it. I suppose you don't mind a bit
about going."

"I should break my heart about it if I did not know I must go one day,
and that the sooner I go the sooner I shall return,--to all I want,
at least. But I have it not in my power to say I will do this, or will
not have that, as it is my brother who educates me, and to whom I am
indebted."

"If you go, Maria, I shall not see you for years and years."

"You will not mind that after a little time."

"Maria, I have never loved to talk to any one so well."

"If that is the only reason you are sorry, I am very glad I go."

She smiled as she spoke, but not a happy smile. I could see she was
very sad, and, as it were, at a distance from her usual self.

"Maria, you have not told me one word about the symphony."

"You did not ask me."

"Were you so proud, then? As if I was not dying to see it, to hear it;
for, Maria, don't tell me you would be contented without its being
heard."

"I am not contented at all, Carl. I am often
discontented,--particularly now."

"About Anastase? Does not Anastase approve of your writing?"

"He knows nothing of it. I would not tell him for a world; nor, Carl,
would you."

"I don't know. I would tell him if it would do you any good, even
though you disliked me to do so."

"Thanks; but it would do me no good. Florimond is poor: he could not
collect an orchestra; and proud: he would not like me to be laughed
at."

"Then what is it, Maria?"

"Carl, you know I am not vain."

I laughed, but answered nothing; it was too absurd a position.

"Well, I am dying of thirst to hear my first movement, which is
written, and which is that sight to my eyes that my ears desire it to
the full as much as they. The second still lingers,--it will not be
invoked. I could, if I could calculate the effect of the first,
produce a second equal to it, I know. But as it is yet in my brain, it
will not give place to another."

"You have tried it upon the piano,--try it for me."

"No, I cannot, Carl. It is nothing thus; and, strange to say, though I
have written it, I cannot play it."

"I can believe that."

"But no one else would, Carl; and therefore it must be folly for me to
have undertaken this writing,--for we are both children, and I suppose
must remain so, after all."

It struck me that the melancholy which poured that pale mask upon her
face was both natural and not unnecessary,--I even delighted in it;
for a thought, almost an idea, flashed straight across my brain, and
lighted up the future, that was still to remain my own, although that
dazzle was withdrawn. I knew what to do now, though I trembled lest I
should not find the way to do it.

"So, Maria, you are not going to finish it just now. Suppose you lend
it to me for a little. I should like to examine it, and it will do me
good."

"Carl, it is not sufficiently scientific to do you good, but I wish
you would take it away, for if I keep it with me, I shall destroy it;
and I shall like it to remain until some day, when God has taught me
more than in myself I know, or than I can learn of men."

"I will take the greatest care of it, Maria," I said, almost fearing
it to be a freak on her part that she suffered my possession, or that
she might withdraw it. "You will ask me for it when you want it; and,
Maria, I have heard it said that it is a good thing to let your
compositions lie by, and come to them with a fresh impression."

"That is exactly what I think. You see with me, Carl, that all which
has to do with music is not music now."

"I think that there is less of the world in music than in anything
else, even in poetry, Maria. But, of course, music must itself fall
short of our ideas of it; and I daresay you found that your beautiful
feelings would not change themselves into music exactly as beautiful
as they were. I know very little music yet, Maria, but I never found
_any_ that did not disappoint my feeling about it when I was hearing
it, except the Chevalier's."

"That is it, Carl. What am I to endeavor, after anything that he has
accomplished? But I feel that if I could not produce the very highest
musical work in the very highest style, I would not produce any, and
would rather die."

"I cannot understand that; I would rather worship than be worshipped."

"I would not. I cannot tell why, but I have a feeling, which will not
let me be content with proving what has gone before me. Dearly as I
love Florimond, he could not put this feeling out of me. I am not
content to be an actress. There have been actresses who were queens,
and some few angels. I know my heart is pure in its desires, and I
should have no objection to reign. But it must be over a new kingdom.
No woman has ever yet composed."

"Oh, yes, Maria!"

"I say no to you, Carl,--not as I mean. I mean no woman has been
supreme among men, as the Chevalier among musicians. I have often
wondered why. And I feel--at least, I did feel--that I could be so,
and do this. But I feel it no longer,--it has passed. Carl, I am very
miserable and cast down."

I could easily believe it, but I was too young to trust to my own
decision. Had Clara been speaking, I should have implicitly relied,
for she always knew herself. But Maria was so wayward, so fitful, and
of late so peculiar that I dared not entertain that confidence in her
genius which was yet the strongest presentiment that had ever taken
hold upon me. I carried away the score, which I had folded up while
she had spoken; and I shall never forget the half-forlorn,
half-wistful look with which she followed it in my arms as I left her.
But I dared not stay, for fear she should change her mind; and
although I would fain have entered into her heart to comfort her, I
could not even try. I was in a breathless state to see that score, but
not much came to my examination. The sheets were exquisitely written,
the manner of Seraphael being exactly imitated, or naturally
identical,--the very noting of a fac-simile, as well as the autograph.
It was styled, "First Symphony," and the key was F minor. But the
composition was so full and close as to swamp completely my childish
criticism. I thought it appeared all right, and very, very wonderful;
but that was all. I wrapped it in one of my best silk handkerchiefs,
to keep it from the dust, and laid it away in my box, together with my
other treasures from home, which ever reposed there; and then I
returned to my work, but certainly more melancholy than I had ever
remembered myself in life.

In March, one day, Maria stayed from school; but her brother Joseph
brought me from her a message. She was indisposed, or said to be so,
and begged me to go and see her. There was no difficulty in doing so,
but I was surprised that Anastase should not be with her, or at least
that he should appear, as he did, so unconcerned. When I expressed my
regret to Joseph Cerinthia, he added that she was only in bed for a
cold. I was both pleased and flattered that she had sent for me, but
still could not comprehend it, as she was so little ill. I ran down,
after the morning, intending to dine with her, or not, I did not care
which. But instead of her being in bed, she was in the parlor.

"I thought, Maria, you were not up."

"I was not; and now I am not dressed. Carl, I sent for you to ask for
the manuscript again."

I looked at her to see whether she meant her request, for it was by no
means easy to say. She looked very brilliant, but had an unusual
darkness round her eyes,--a wide ring of the deepest violet. She
either had wept forth that shadow, or was in a peculiar state. Neither
tears nor smiles were upon her face, and her lips burned with a living
scarlet,--no rose-soft red, as wont. Her hair, fastened under her cap
in long bands, fell here and there, and seemed to have no strength.
She had been drinking _eau sucrée_, for a glass of it was upon the
table, and a few fresh flowers, which she hastened to put away from
her as I entered. I was so much affected by her looks, though no fear
seized me, that I took her hand. It was dry and warm, but very weak
and tremulous.

"Maria, you were at that garden last night, and danced. I knew how it
would be,--it was too early in the year."

"I was not at the Spielheim, for when Florimond said none of you were
going from Cecilia, I declined. But no dancing would have made me ill
as I have been; it was nothing to care for, and is now past."

"Was it cold, then? It seems more like fever."

"It was neither, or perhaps a little of both. Let me have my score
again, Carl. I need only ask for it, you know, as it is mine."

"You need not be so proud, Maria. I shall of course return it, but not
unless you promise me to do no more to it just now."

"Not _just_ now. But I made believe to be ill on purpose that I might
have a day's leisure. I must also copy it out."

"Maria, you never made believe, for if you _could_ tell a lie, it
would not be for yourself. You _have_ been ill, and I suspect much
that I know how. If you will tell me, I will fetch the score,--that
is, if it is good for you to have it. But I would rather burn it than
that it should hurt you; and I tell you, it all depends upon that."

"I will tell you, Carl, and more, because it is over now, and cannot
happen again. I was lying in my bed, and heard the clock strike ten. I
thought also that I had heard it rain; so I got up and looked out.
There was no rain, but there were stars; and seeing them, my thoughts
grew bright,--bright as when I imagined that music; and being in the
same mood,--that is, quiet and yet excited, if you can believe in both
together,--I went to my writing. It was all there ready for me; and
Josephine, who always disturbs me, because she talks, was very fast
asleep. It may sound proud, Carlino, but I am certain the Chevalier
was with me,--that he stood behind my chair, and I could not look
round for fear of seeing him. He guided my hand; he thrust out my
ideas,--all grew clear; and I was not afraid, even of a ghost
companion."

"But the Chevalier is alive and well."

"And yet, I tell you, his ghost was with me. Well, Carl, I had written
until I could not see, for my lamp went out, and it was not yet light.
I suppose I then fell asleep, for I certainly had a vision."

"What was that, Maria?"

"Countless crowds, Carl, first, and then a most horrible whirl and
rush. Then a serene place, gray as morning before the sun, with great
golden organ-pipes, that shot up into and cut through the sky; for
although it was gray beneath, and I seemed to stand upon clouds, it
was all blue over me, and when I looked up, it seemed to return my
gaze. I heard a sound under me, like an orchestra, such as we have
often heard. But _above_, there was another music, and the golden
pipes quivered as if with its trembling; yet it was not the organ that
seemed to speak, and no instrument was there besides. This music did
not interfere with the music of the orchestra,--still playing
onwards,--but it swelled through and through it, and seemed to stretch
like a sky into the sky. Oh, Carl, that I could describe it to you! It
was like all we feel of music,--beyond all we hear, given to us in
hearing."

She paused. Now a light, quenched in thrilling tears, arose, and
glittered from her eyes. She looked overwrought, seraphic; for though
her hand, which I still held, was not changed or cold, her countenance
told unutterable wonder,--the terrors of the heavenliest enthusiasm, I
knew not how to account for.

"Maria, dear! I have had quite as strange dreams, and almost as sweet.
It was very natural, but you were very, very naughty all the same.
What did you do when you awoke?"

"I awoke I don't know how, Carl, nor when; but I resolved to give
into my symphony all that the dream had given me, and I wrote again.
This time I left off, though in a very odd manner. The clock struck
five, and all the people were in the streets. I was cold, which I had
forgotten, and my feet were quite as ice. I was about to turn a leaf
when I shivered and dropped my pen. But when I stooped down to find it
in the early twilight, which, I thought, would help me, I fell upon
the floor. My head was as if fire had burst into it, and a violent
pain came on, that drove me to my bed. I have had such a pain
before,--a little, but very much less; for I believed I could not bear
it. I did fall asleep too, for a long time, and never heard a sound;
and when I arose, I was as well as I need to be, or ever expect. But
as I don't wish to be ill again, I must finish the symphony at once."

"So you think I shall allow it? No, Maria, it is out of the question;
but I will fetch a doctor for you."

"Carl, you are a baby. I have seen a doctor in Paris for this very
pain. He can do nothing for it, and says it is constitutional, and
that I shall always be subject to it. Everybody has something they are
subject to,--Florimond has the gout."

I laughed,--glad to have anything at all to laugh at.

"I am really well now, Carl,--have had a warm bath, and leeches upon
my temples; everything. The woman here has waited upon me, and has
been very kind; and now I have sent her away, for I do hate to seem
ill and be thought ill."

"Leeches, Maria?"

"Oh, that is nothing! I put them on whenever I choose. Did you never
have them on, Carl?"

"No, never. I had a blister for the measles, because I could not bear
to think about leeches. I did not know people put them on for the
headache."

"I always do, and so does everybody for such headaches as mine. But
they have taken away the pain, and that is all I care for. They are
little cold creepers, though; and I was glad to pull them off."

"Show me the marks, Maria."

She lifted her beautiful soft hair. Those cruel little notches were
some hieroglyph to me of unknown suffering that her face expressed,
though I was too young, and far too ignorant, to imagine of what kind
and import.

"I promise you, Maria, that if you attempt to write any more, I will
tell Anastase. Or no,--I have thought of something far more clever: I
will make off with the rest at once."

I had an idea of finding her sheets in her own room; and plunging into
it,--frightening Josephine, who was nursing her doll, into a remote
corner, I gathered all the papers, and folding them together, was
about to rush downstairs without returning to Maria, when she called
upon me so that I dared not help listening. For, "You dare not do it,
Carl!" she cried; "you will kill me, and I shall die now."

Agonized by her expression, which was not even girl-like, I halted for
an instant at her open door.

"Then, Maria, if I leave them here, on your honor, will you not touch
them or attempt to write?"

"It is not your affair, Carl, and I am angry."

She showed she was angry,--very pale, with two crimson spots, and she
bit her lip almost black.

"It _is_ my affair, as you told _me_, and not your brother or
Florimond. He or Florimond would not allow it, you know as well as I
do."

"They should and would. And, pray, why is it I am not to write? I
should say you were jealous, Carl, if you were not Carl. But you have
no right to forbid it, and shall not."

"I do not know how to express my fear, but I am afraid, and, Maria, I
will not let it be done."

Lest I should commit myself, I closed the door, stumbled down the dark
staircase, tore through the street, and deposited the sheets with the
others in the box. I am conscious these details are tedious and
oppressive; but they cannot be withheld, because of what I shall have
to touch upon.

Fearful were the consequences that descended upon my devoted head. I
little expected them, and suffered from them absurdly, child as I was,
and most witless at that time. Maria returned on the following day
week, and looking quite herself, except for those violet shades yet
lingering,--still not herself to me in any sense. She scarcely looked
at me, and did not speak to me at all when I managed to meet her.
Anastase alone seemed conscious that she had been ill. He appeared
unable to rid himself of the impression; for actually during my
lesson, when his custom was to eschew a conventionalism even as a
wrong note, he asked me what had been the matter with her. I told him
I believed a very awful headache, with fever, and that I considered
she had been very ill indeed. I saw his face cloud, though he made
reply all coolness, "You are mistaken, Auchester. It was a cold, which
always produces fever, and often pain." Thus we were all alike
deluded; thus was that motherless one hurried to her Father's house!

Meantime, silent as I kept myself on the subject of the symphony, it
held me day by day more firmly. I longed almost with suffering for the
season when I should emancipate myself from all my doubts.




CHAPTER VIII.


The season came, and I shall never forget its opening. It was late in
April,--exquisite weather, halcyon, blooming; my memory expands to it
now. From Italy he returned. He came upon us suddenly,--there was no
time to organize a procession, to marshal a welcome chorus; none knew
of his arrival until he appeared.

We had been rambling in the woods, Franz and I, and were lounging
homewards, laden with wild-flowers and lily bunches. Franz was a kind
creature to me now, and in my loneliness I sought him always. We
heard, even among the moss, a noise of distant shoutings,--nobody
shouted in that spot except our own,--and we hurried homewards. I was
quite faint with expectation, and being very weary, sat down to rest
on one of those seats that everywhere invite in shady places, while
Delemann sped onwards for information.

Returning, he announced most gleefully, "The Chevalier has arrived;
they are drawing the carriage up the hill." I am ashamed of what I
did. I could not return to Cecilia; I wandered about in the village,
possessed by a vague aspiration that I should see him there, or that
he would espy me: no such thing.

I came back to supper excited, expectant; he was gone. I deserved it,
and felt I did, for my cowardice; but at the end of supper the head of
the central table, having waited until then, deliberately took from
his deep pocket and presented me with a note, a very tiny note, that
was none the fresher for having lain an hour or two amidst snuff and
"tabac." But this noteling almost set me raving. It was short indeed,
yet honey sweet.

      I am not to find thee here, my Carl, although I came on
      purpose. Art not thou still my eldest child? Come to me,
      then, to-morrow, it will be thy Sunday, and thy room shall
      be ready; also two little friends of thine,--I and he. Do
      not forget me.

      Thine,
      SERAPHAEL.

He had made every arrangement for my visit, and I never think of his
kindness in these particulars without being reminded that in
proportion to the power of his genius was it ever beneficently gentle.
I spent such an afternoon as would have been cheaply purchased by a
whole life of solitude; but I must only advert to one circumstance
that distinguished it.

We were walking upon the lovely terrace amongst bright marbles just
arranged, and dazzling flowers; he was gentle, genial, animated,--I
felt my time was come. I therefore taught myself to say: "Sir, I have
a very, most particular favor to ask of you; it is that you will
condescend to give me your opinion of a piece of music which some one
has written. I have brought it with me on purpose,--may I fetch it? It
is in my hat in the house."

"By all means, this very moment, Carlomein,--or, no, rather we will go
in-doors together and examine it quietly. It is thine own, of course?"

"Oh, no, sir! I should have said so directly. It is a young lady's,
and she knows nothing of my bringing it. I stole it from her."

"Ah! true," he replied, simply; and led me to that beautiful
music-room. I was fain to realize Maria's dream as I beheld those
radiant organ-pipes beneath their glorious arch, that deep-wooded
pianoforte, with its keys, milk-white and satin-soft, recalling me but
to that which was lovelier than her very vision,--the lustrous
presence pervading that luxury of artistic life. Seraphael was more
innocent, more brilliant in behavior at his home than anywhere; the
noble spaces and exquisitely appointed rooms seemed to affect him
merely as secluded warmth affects an exotic flower; he expanded more
fully, fragrantly, in the rich repose.

At the cedar writing-table he paused, and stood waiting silently while
I fetched the score. As I unfolded it before him I was even more
astonished than ever at the perfection of its appearance; I hesitated
not the least to place it in those most delicate of all delicate
hands. I saw his eyes, that seemed to have drawn into them the very
violet of the Italian heaven, so dark they gleamed through the
down-let lashes, fasten themselves eagerly for an instant upon the
title-sheet, where, after his own fashion, Maria had written her
ancient name, "Cerinthia," only, in the corner; but then he laid the
score, having opened the first page, upon the table, and knelt down
before it, plunging his fingers into the splendid curls of his regal
head, his very brow being buried in their shadow as he bent, bowed,
leaned into the page, and page after page until the end.

With restless rapidity his hand flashed back the leaves, his eye drank
the spirit of those signs; but he spoke not, stirred not. It seemed to
me that I must not watch him, as I was doing most decidedly, and I
disentangled myself from that revery with a shock.

I walked to the carved music-stands, the painted music-cases. I
examined the costly manuscripts and olden tomes arrayed on polished
cabinets. I blinded myself with the sunshine streaming through stained
compartments in the windows to the carnation-toned velvet of the
furniture. I peered into the pianoforte, and yearned for it to awaken;
and rested long and rapturously before a mighty marble likeness of the
self-crowned Beethoven. It was garlanded with grapes and vine-leaves
that fondled the wild locks in gracefullest fraternity; it was mounted
upon a pedestal of granite, where also the alabaster fruits and
tendrils clustered, clasping it like frozen summer, and beneath the
bust the own investment glittered,--"Tonkunst's Bacchus."[6] It was no
longer difficult to pass away the time without being troublesome to
myself or Seraphael. I was lost in a triumphant reminiscence that the
stormy brow, the eyes of lightning, the torn heart, the weary soul,
were now heaven's light, heaven's love, its calm, its gladness. For
quite an hour I stood there, so remembering and desiring ever to
remember. And then that sweet, that living voice aroused me. Without
looking up, he said,--

"Do you mean to say, Carlomein, that she has had no help here?"

"Sir, she could have had none; it was all and entirely her own. No one
knew she had written except myself."

Then in his clearest tones he answered: "It is as I expected. It is
terrible, Carlomein, to think that this work might have perished; and
I embrace thee, Carlomein, for having secured to me its possession."

"Is it so very good then, sir? Maria was very ignorant about it, and
could not even play it for herself."

"I daresay not, she has made too full a score." He smiled his sweetest
smile. "But for all that, we will not strike out one note. Why is it
not finished, Carlomein?"

I might have related the whole story from beginning to end; but his
manner was very regal just now, and I merely said: "I rather think she
was dissatisfied with the first two movements, for although she said
she could finish it, she did not, and I have kept it some time."

"You should have written to me, Carlomein, or sent it to me; it must
and shall be finished. The work is of Heaven's own. What earthly
inspiration could have taught her strains like these? They are of a
priestess and a prophetess; she has soared beyond us all."

He arose suddenly; a fixed glow was upon his face, his eyes were one
solemn glory. He came to the piano, he pushed me gently aside, he took
his seat noiselessly, as he began to play. I would not retire. I stood
where I could both see and hear. It was the second movement that first
arrested him. He gave to the white-faced keys a hundred voices. Tone
upon tone was built; the chords grew larger and larger; no other hand
could have so elicited the force, the burden, the breadth of the
orchestral medium, from those faint notes and few. His articulating
finger supplied all needs of mechanism. He doubled and redoubled his
power.

Never shall I forget it,--the measures so long and lingering, the
modulations so like his own, the very subject moulded from the chosen
key, like sculpture of the most perfect chiselling from a block of the
softest grain,--so appropriate, so masterly. But what pained me
through the loveliness of the conception was to realize the mood
suggesting it,--a plaint of spiritual suffering, a hungering and
thirsting heart, a plea of exhausted sadness.

He felt it too; for as the weary, yet unreproachful strain fell from
under his music-burdened fingers, he drooped his glorious head as a
lily in the drenching rain, his lips grew grave, the ecstatic smile
was lost, and in his eyes there was a dim expression, though they
melted not to tears. I was sure that Maria had conserved her dream,
for a strange, intermittent accompaniment streamed through the loftier
appeal, and was as a golden mist over too much piercing brightness.

The movement was very long, and he never spoke all through it, neither
when he had played as far as she had written; but turned back to the
first, as yet untried.

Again was I forcibly reminded of what I had said on my first
acquaintance with her; she had, without servile intention, caught the
very spirit of Seraphael as it wandered through his compositions, and
imprisoned it in the sympathy of her own. It was as two flowers whose
form is single and the same, but the hues were of different
distribution, and still his own supreme. I cannot describe the first
movement further. I was too young to be astonished, carried away by
the miracle of its consummation under such peculiar circumstances; but
I can remember how completely I felt I might always trust myself in
future when any one should gain such ascendency over my
convictions,--which, by the way, never happened.

I must not dwell upon that evening,--suffice it to say that I left the
score with the Chevalier; and though he did not tell me so in so many
words, I felt sure he himself would restore it to the writer.

On Monday evening I was very expectant, and not in vain, for she sent
me a note of invitation,--an attention I had not received from her
since my rebellious behavior. She was alone, and even now writing. She
arose hastily, and for some moments could not command her voice; she
said what I shall not repeat, except that she was too generous as
regarded her late distance, and then she explained what follows.

"The Chevalier came this morning, and, Carl, I could only send for you
because it is you who have done it all for me, in spite of my
ingratitude; and, alas! I never can repay you. I feel, Carl, now, that
it is better not to have all one wishes for at once; if I had not
waited, the shock would have killed me."

I looked at her, tried to make out to my sight that she did not, even
now, look as if ready to die; her lips had lost their fever rose, and
were pale as the violets that strewed her eyes. The faint blue threads
of veins on the backs of her hands, the thin polish of those temples
standing clear from her darkest hair,--these things burned upon my
brain and gave me a sickening thrill. I felt, "Can Anastase have seen
her? Can he have known this?"

I was most of all alarmed at what I myself had done; still, I was
altogether surprised at the renewal of my fears, for on the Saturday
she had not only seemed, but been herself,--her cheeks, her lips, her
brow, all wearing the old healthful radiance.

"Maria," I exclaimed, "dear Maria, will you tell me why this symphony
makes you ill, or look so ill? You were quite well on Saturday, I
thought, or you may quite believe I should never have done what I
did."

"Do I look ill, Carl? I do not feel ill, only desperately excited. I
have no headache, and, what is better, no heart-pain now. Do you know
what is to be? I tell you, because you will rejoice that you have done
it. This work is to be finished and to be heard. An orchestra will
return my dream to God."

"Ah! your dream, Maria,--I thought of that. But shall _I_ hear it,
Maria?"

"You will play for me, Carl,--and Florimond. Oh! I must not remember
that. And the Chevalier, Carl,--he even entreated, the proud soul, the
divinely missioned, entreated me to perpetuate the work. I can write
now without fear; he has made me free. I feared myself before; now I
only fear him."

"Maria, what of Anastase? Does he know, and what does he think?"

"Do not ask me, Carl, for I cannot tell you what he did. He was
foolish, and so was I; but it was for joy on both our parts."

"You cried then! There is nothing to be ashamed of."

"We ought to have restrained ourselves when the Chevalier was by. He
must love Florimond now, for he fetched him himself, and told him what
I had done, and was still to do."

It is well for us that time does not stay,--not grievous, but a
gladsome thought that all we most dread is carried beyond our reach by
its force, and that all we love and long to cherish is but taken that
it may remain, beyond us, to ripen in eternity until we too ripen to
enjoy it. Still, there is a pain, wholly untinctured with pleasure, in
recalling certain of its shocks, re-living them, returning upon them
with memory.

The most glorious of our days, however, strike us with as troubled a
reminiscence, so that we ought not to complain, nor to desire other
than that the past should rest, as it does, and as alone the dead
beside repose,--in hope. I have brought myself to the recollection of
certain passages in my youth's history simply because there is nothing
more precious than the sympathy, so rare, of circumstance with
passion; nothing so difficult to describe, yet that we so long to
win.

It is seldom that what happens as chance we would have left unchanged,
could we have passed sentence of our will upon it; but still more
unwonted is it to feel, after a lapse of eventful times, that what
_has_ happened was not only the best, but the only thing to happen,
all things considered that have intervened. This I feel now about the
saddest lesson I learned in my exuberant boyhood,--a lesson I have
never forgotten, and can never desire to discharge from my life's
remembrance.

Everything prospered with us after the arrangement our friend and lord
had made for Maria. I can only say of my impressions that they were of
the utmost perfectibility of human wishes in their accomplishment, for
she had indeed nothing left to wish for.

I would fain delineate the singular and touching gratitude she evinced
towards Seraphael, but it did not distribute itself in words; I
believe she was altogether so much affected by his goodness that she
dared not dwell upon it. I saw her constantly between his return and
the approaching examinations; but our intercourse was still and
silent. I watched her glide from room to room at Cecilia, or found her
dark hair sweeping the score at home so calmly--she herself calmer
than the calmest,--calm as Anastase himself. Indeed, to him she
appeared to have transferred the whole impetuousness of her nature; he
was changed also, his kindness to myself warmer than it ever had been;
but from his brow oppressed, his air of agitation, I deemed him verily
most anxious for the result. Maria had not more than a month to work
upon the rest of the symphony and to complete it, as Seraphael had
resolutely resolved that it should be rehearsed before our summer
separation.

Maria I believe would not have listened to such an arrangement from
any other lips; and Florimond's dissatisfaction at a premature
publicity was such that the Chevalier--autocratic even in granting a
favor, which he must ever grant in his own way--had permitted the
following order to be observed in anticipation.

After our own morning performance by the pupils only and their
respective masters, the hall would be cleared, the audience and
members should disperse, and only the strictly required players for
the orchestra remain; Seraphael himself having chosen these. Maria was
herself to conduct the rehearsal, and those alone whose assistance she
would demand had received an intimation of the secret of her
authorship. I trembled when the concluding announcement was made to
me, for I had a feeling that she could not be kept too quiet; also,
Anastase, to my manifest appreciation, shared my fear. But Seraphael
was irresistible, especially as Maria had assented, had absorbed
herself in the contemplation of her intentions, even to eagerness,
that they should be achieved.

Our orchestra was, though small, brilliant, and in such perfect
training as I seldom experienced in England. Our own rehearsals were
concluded by the week before our concert, and there remained rather
less for me to do. Those few days I was inexpressibly wretched,--a
foreboding drowned my ecstatic hopes in dread; they became a constant
effort to maintain, though even everything still smiled around us.

The Tuesday was our concert morning, and on the Sunday that week I met
Maria as we came from church. She was sitting in the sunlight, upon
one of the graves. Josephine was not near her, nor her brother, only
Florimond, who was behind me, ran and joined her before I beheld that
she beckoned to me. I did hardly like to go forward as they were both
together, but he also made me approach by a very gentle smile. The
broad lime-trees shadowed the church, and the blossoms, unopened, hung
over them in ripest bud; it was one of those oppressively sweet
seasons that remind one--at least me--of the resurrection morning.

"Sit down by me, Carl," said Maria, who had taken off her gloves, and
was already playing with Florimond's fingers, as if she were quite
alone with him, though the churchyard was yet half filled with people.

"Maria," I said, sitting down at the foot of a cross that was hung
with faded garlands, "why don't you sit in the shade? It is a very
warm day."

"So it is very warm, and that is what I like; I am never warm enough
here, and Florimond, too, loves the sun. I could not sit under a tree
this day, everything is so bright; but nothing can be as bright as I
wish it. Carl, I was going to tell Florimond, and I will tell you,
that I feel as if I were too glad to bear what is before me. I did not
think so until it came so very near. I am afraid when I stand up my
heart will fail."

"Are you frightened, Maria?" I asked in my simplicity.

"That is not it, though I am also frightened. But I feel as if it were
scarcely the thing for me to do, to stand up and control those of whom
I am not master. Is it not so, Florimond?"

"Maria, the Chevalier is the only judge; and I am certain you will
not, as a woman, allow your feelings to get the better of you. I have
a great deal more to suffer on your account than you can possibly
feel."

"I do not see that."

"It is so, and should be seen by you. If your work should in any
respect fail, imagine what that failure would cost me."

I looked up in utter indignation, but was disarmed by the expression
of his countenance; a vague sadness possessed it, a certain air of
tender resignation; his hauteur had melted, though his manner retained
its distance.

"As if it could be a failure!" I exclaimed; "why, we already know how
much it is!"

"I do not, Auchester, and I am not unwilling to confess my ignorance.
If our symphony even prove worthy of our Cecilia, I shall still be
anxious."

"Why, Florimond?" she demanded, wistfully.

"On account of your health. You know what you promised me."

"Not to write for a year. That is easy to say."

"But not so easy to do. You make every point an extreme, Maria."

"I cannot think what you mean about my health."

"You cannot?"

She blushed lightly and frowned a shade. "I have told you, Florimond,
how often I have had that pain before."

"And you told me also what they said."

His tones were now so grave that I could not bear to conjecture their
significance. He went on.

"I do not consider, Maria, that for a person of genius it is any
hardship to be discouraged from too much effort, especially when the
effect will become enhanced by a matured experience."

"You are very unkind, Florimond."

Indeed, I thought so, too.

"I only care to please you."

"No, Maria, you had not a thought of me in writing."

"And yet you yourself gave me the first idea. But you are right; I
wrote without reference to any one, and because I burned to do so."

"And you burn less now for it? Tell me that."

"I do not burn any longer, I weary for it to be over; I desire to hear
it once, and then you may take it away, and I will never see it any
more."

"That is quite as unnatural as the excessive desire,--to have fatigued
of what you loved. But, Maria, I trust this weariness of yours will
not appear before the Chevalier, after all his pains and interest."

"I hope so too, Florimond; but I do not know."

It did not. The next day the Chevalier came over to Cecilia, and slept
that night in the village. The tremendous consequence of the next
twenty-four hours might almost have erased, as a rolling sea, all
identical remembrance; and, indeed, it has sufficed to leave behind it
what is as but a picture once discerned, and then forever
darkened,--the cool, early romance of the wreaths and garlands (for we
all rose at dawn to decorate the entrance, the corridors, the hall,
the reception-room), the masses of May-bloom and lilies that arrived
with the sun; the wild beauty overhanging everything; the mysterious
freshness I have mentioned, or some effects just so conceived, before.

I myself adorned with laurels and lilies the conductor's desk, and the
whole time as much in a dream as ever when asleep,--at all events I
could even realize less. Maria was not at hand, nor could I see her,
she breakfasted alone with Anastase; and although I shall never know
what happened between them that morning, I have ever rejoiced that she
did so.

When our floral arrangements were perfected I could not even criticise
them. I flew to my bed and sat down upon it, holding my violin, my
dearest, in my arms; there I rested, perhaps slept. Strange thoughts
were mine in that short time, which seemed immeasurably
lengthening,--most like dreams, too, those very thoughts, for they
were all rushing to a crisis. I recalled my cue, however, and what
that alarming peal of a drum meant, sounding through the avenues of
Cecilia.

As we ever cast off things behind, my passion could only hold upon the
future. I was but, with all my speed, just in time to fall into
procession with the rest. The chorus first singing, the band in the
midst, behind, our professors in order, and on either side our own
dark lines the female pupils,--a double streak of white. I have not
alluded to our examinations, with which, however, I had had little
enough to do. But we all pressed forward in contemporaneous state, and
so entered the antechamber of the hall. It was the most purely
brilliant scene I ever saw, prepared under the eye of the masters in
our universal absence; I could recognize but one taste, but one eye,
one hand, in that blending of all deep with all most dazzling
flower-tints.

One double garland, a harp in a circle,--the symbol of immortal
harmony,--wrought out of snowy roses and azure ribbons, hung exactly
above the table; but the table was itself covered with snowy damask,
fold upon fluted fold, so that nothing, whatever lay beneath it, could
be given to the gaze.

Through the antechamber to the decorated hall we passed, and then a
lapse of music half restored me to myself,--only half, despite the
overture of his, with choral relief, with intersong, that I had never
heard before, and that he had written only for us: despite his
presence, his conducting charm.

In little more than an hour we returned, pell-mell now, just as we
pleased, notwithstanding calls to order and the pulses of the
measuring voices. Just then I found myself by Maria. Through that
sea-like resonance she whispered,--

"Do not be surprised, Carl, if the Chevalier presents you with a
prize."

"I have not tried for one, Maria."

"I know that, but he will nevertheless distinguish you, I am certain
of it."

"I hope not. Keep near me, Maria."

"Yes, surely, if I can; but oh, Carl, I am glad to be near you! Is
that a lyre above the table? for I can scarcely see."

She was, as I expected, pale,--not paler than ever; for it was very
long since she had been paler than any one I ever saw, except the
Chevalier. But his was as the lustre of the whitest glowing
fire,--hers was as the light of snow. She was all pale except her
eyes, and that strange halo she had never lost shone dim as the
darkliest violets, a soft yet awful hue. I had replied to her question
hurriedly, "Yes; and it must have taken all the roses in his garden."
And last of all, she said to me, in a tone which suggested more
suffering than all her air: "I wish I were one of those roses."

The table, when the rich cover was removed, presented a spectacle of
fascination scarcely to be appreciated except by those immediately
affected. Masses of magnificently bound volumes, painted and carved
instrument-cases, busts and portraits of the hierarchy of music, lay
together in according contrast. For, as I have not yet mentioned, the
Chevalier had carried out his abolition of the badges to the utmost;
there was not a medal to be seen. But these prizes were beyond the
worth of any medal, each by each. One after another left the table in
those delicate hands, wafted to its fortunate possessor by a
compliment more delicate still, and I fancied no more remained.

Maria still stood near me; and as the moments flew, a stillness more
utter than I could have imagined pervaded her, a marbled quietness
crept over every muscle; and as I met her exquisite countenance in
profile, with the eyes downward and fixed, and not an eyelash
stirring, she might have been the victim of despair, or the genius of
enraptured hope.

I saw that the Chevalier had proceeded to toss over and over the
flowers which had strewn the gifts,--as if it were all, also, over
now,--and he so long continued to trifle with them that I felt as if
he saw Maria, and desired to attract from her all other eyes, for he
talked the whole time lightly, laughingly, with an air of the most
ravishing gayety, to those about him, and to every one except
ourselves.

In a few minutes, which appeared to be a very hour, he gathered up,
with a handful of flowers that he let slip through his fingers
directly, something which he retained in his hand, and which it now
struck me that he had concealed, whatever it was, by that flower-play
of his all along; for it was even diffidently, certainly with reserve
of some kind, that he approached us last, as we stood together and did
not stir.

"These," said he to me in a voice that just trembled, though aërially
joyous, "are too small to make speeches about; but in memory of
several secrets we have between us, I hope you will sometimes wear
them."

He then looked full at Maria; but she responded not even to that
electric force that is itself the touch of light,--her eyes still
downcast, her lips unmoved. He turned to me, and softly, seriously,
yet half surprised, as it were, shook his head, placing in her hand
the first of the unknown caskets he had brought, and the other in my
own. She took it without looking up, or even murmuring her thanks;
still, immediately as he returned to the table, I forced it from her,
feeling it might and ought to occasion a revulsion of sensation,
however slight.

It succeeded so far as that she gazed, still bending downwards, upon
what I held in my own hand now, and exhibited to her. It was a
full-blown rose of beaten silver, white as snow, without a leaf, but
exquisitely set upon a silver stem, and having upon one of its broad
petals a large dewdrop of the living diamond.

I opened my own strange treasure then, having resigned to her her own.
This was a breastpin of purest gold, with the head--a great violet cut
from a single amethyst--as perfectly executed as hers. I thrust it
into my pocket, for I could not at that instant even rejoice in its
possession. And now soon, very soon, the flower-lighted space was
cleared, and we, the chosen few, alone remained.

My heart felt as if it could only break, so violent was the pulse that
shook it. I knew that I must make an effort transcending all, or I
should lose my power to handle the bow; and at least I achieved
composure of behavior. Anastase, I can remember, came to me; he
touched my hand, and as if he longed, with all loosened passion, for
something like sympathy, looked into my very eyes. I could scarcely
endure that gaze,--it was inquisitive to scrutiny, yet dim with
unutterable forecast.

The flowers in the concert-hall were already withering when, after a
short separation for refreshment, we returned there, and were shut in
safely by the closed doors from the distant festal throng.

It was a strange sight, those deserted seats in front, where now none
rested saving only the Chevalier, who, after hovering amidst the
orchestra until all the ranks were filled, had descended, as was
arranged, into the void space, that he might be prepared to criticise
the performance. He did not seem much in the mood for criticism; his
countenance was lightening with excitement, his eyes burned like stars
brought near: that hectic fire, that tremulous blaze were both for
her.

As he retreated, and folding his slender arms and raising his glorious
head, still stood, Maria entered with Anastase. Florimond led her
forward in her white dress, as he had promised himself to lead her
captive on the day of her espousals; neither hurried nor abashed, she
came in her virgin calm, her virgin paleness. But as they stood for
one moment at the foot of the orchestra, he paused, arrested her, his
hand was raised; and in a moment, with a smile whose tenderness for
that moment triumphed, he had placed the silver rose in her dark hair,
where it glistened, an angelic symbol to the recognition of every one
present. She did not smile in return, nor raise her eyes, but mounted
instantly and stood amidst us.

I had no idea, until, indeed, she stood there, a girl amidst
us,--until she appeared in that light of which she herself was
light,--how very small she was, how slightly framed; every emotion was
articulated by the fragility of her form as she stirred so calmly,
silently. The bright afternoon from many windows poured upon the
polish of her forehead, so arched, so eminent; but, alas! upon the
languors also that had woven their awful mists around her eyes. Her
softly curling lips spoke nothing now but the language of sleep in
infancy, so gently parted, but not as in inspiration. As she raised
that arm so calmly, and the first movement came upon me, I could not
yet regard her, nor until a rest occurred. Then I saw her the same
again, except that her eyes were filled with tears, and over all her
face that there was a shadow playing as from some sweeping solemn
wing, like the imagery of summer leaves that trembles upon a moonlit
grass.

Only once I heard that music, but I do not remember it, nor can call
upon myself to describe it. I only know that while in the full
thrilling tide of that first movement I was not aware of playing, or
how I played, though very conscious of the weight upon my heart and
upon every instrument. Even Anastase, next whom I stood, was not
himself in playing. I cannot tell whether the conductress were herself
unsteady, but she unnerved us all, or something too near unnerved
us,--we were noiselessly preparing for that which was at hand.

At the close of the movement a rushing cadence of ultimate rapidity
broke from the stringed force, but the wind flowed in upon the final
chords; they waned, they expanded, and at the simultaneous pause she
also paused. Then strangely, suddenly, her arm fell powerless, her
paleness quickened to crimson, her brow grew warm with a bursting
blood-red blush,--she sank to the floor upon her side silently as in
the south wind a leaf just flutters and is at rest; nor was there a
sound through the stricken orchestra as Florimond raised her and
carried her from us in his arms.

None moved beside, except the Chevalier, who, with a gaze that was as
of one suddenly blinded, followed Anastase instantaneously. We
remained as we stood, in a suspense that I, for one, could never have
broken. Poor Florimond's violin lay shattered upon the floor, the
strings shivered, and yet shuddering; the rose lay also low. None
gathered either up, none stirred, nor any brought us word. I believe I
should never have moved again if Delemann, in his living kindness, had
not sped from us at last.

He, too, was long away,--long, long to return; nor did he, in
returning, re-enter the orchestra. He beckoned to me from the screen
of the antechamber. I met him amidst the glorious garlands, but I made
way to him I know not how. That room was deserted also, and all who
had been there had gone. Whither? Oh! where might they now remain?
Franz whispered to me, and of his few, sad words--half hope, half
fear, all anguish--I cannot repeat the echo. But it is sufficient for
all to remind myself how soon the hope had faded, after few, not many
days; how the fear passed with it, but not alone. Yet, whatever
passed, whatever faded, left us love forever,--love, with its dear
regrets, its infinite expectations!

FOOTNOTE:

[6] The Bacchus of Music.




CHAPTER IX.


Twelve years of after-life cannot but weigh lighter in the balance of
recollection than half that number in very early youth. I think this
now, pondering upon the threshold of middle age with an enthusiasm
fixed and deepened by every change; but I did not think so the day to
which I shall defer my particular remembrances,--the day I had left
Germany forever,--except in dreams. There were other things I might
have left behind that now I carried to my home,--things themselves all
dreams, yet containing in their reminiscences the symbols of my every
reality. Eternity alone could contain the substance of those shadows;
that shore we deem itself to shadow, alone contains the resolution
into glory of all our longings, into peace of all our pain.

Such feelings, engendered by loneliness, took me by the very hand and
led me forwards that dreary December evening when I landed in England
last, having obtained all that was absolutely necessary to be made my
own abroad.

I have not tormented my reader or two with the most insignificant
mention of myself between this evening and a time some years before;
it would have been impracticable, or, if practicable, impertinent, as
I lived those after years entirely within and to myself. The sudden
desertion which had stricken Cecilia of her hero lord, and that
suspension of his presence which ensued, had no more power upon me
than to call out what was, indeed, demanded of me under such
circumstances,--all the persistency of my nature. And if even there
had been a complete and actual surrender of all her privileges by
professors and pupils, I should have been the last to be found there,
and I think that I should have played to the very empty halls until
ruin hungered for them and we had fallen together. As it happened,
however, my solitude was more actual than any I could have provided
for myself; my spirit retreated, and to music alone remained either
master or slave.

The very representative of music was no longer such to me; for when we
came together after that fatal midsummer no sign was left of
Anastase,--"a new king had arisen in Egypt, who knew not Joseph." To
him I ought, perhaps, to confess that I owed a good deal, but I cannot
believe it,--I am fain to think I should have done as well alone; but
there was that in the association and habitude of the place, that in
the knowledge of being still under the superintendence, however formal
and abstracted, of its head, that I could not, and would not, have
flung up the chances of its academical career.

It was, however, no effort to disengage myself from the spot, for any
notion of the presence of him I best loved was, alas! now, and had
been long, entirely dissociated from it. Not one smile from those fair
lips, not one ray from those awful eyes, had sunned the countenances
of the ever-studious throng. A monastery could not have been more
secluded from the incarnate presence of the Deity than were we in that
quiet institution from its distant director.

Let it not be imagined, at the same time, that we could have existed
in ignorance of that influence which was streaming--an "eastern
star"--through the country that contained him as a light of life,
which in the few fleeting years of my boyhood had garnered such
illustrious immortality for one scarcely past his own first youth. But
in leaving Germany I was leaving neither the name nor the fame of
Seraphael, except to meet them again where they were dearer yet and
brighter than in their cradle-land.

None could estimate--and, young as I yet was, I well knew it--the
proportion of the renown his early works had gained in this strange
country. The noblest attribute of race, the irresistible conception of
the power of race, had scarcely then received a remote encouragement,
though physiologists abounded; but, like our artists, they lacked an
ideal, or, like our politicians, "a man."

Still, whether people knew it or not, they insensibly worshipped the
perfect beauty whose development was itself music, and whose
organization, matchless and sublimated, was but the purest type of
that human nature on which the Divine One placed his signet, and which
he instituted by sharing, the nearest to his own. Those who did know
it, denied it in the face of their rational conviction, because it was
so hard to allow that to be a special privilege in which they can bear
no earthly part; for all the races of the earth cannot tread down one
step of that race, nor diminish in each millennium its spiritual
approximation to an everlasting endurance. Or, perhaps, to do them
justice, the very conviction was as dark to them as that of death,
which all must hold, and so few care to remind themselves of. At all
events, it was yet a whisper--and a whisper not so universally wafted
as whispers in general are--that Seraphael was of unperverted Hebrew
ancestry, both recognizant of the fact and auspicious in its
entertainment.

Many things affected me as changes when I landed at London Bridge,
for I had not been at home for three whole years, and was not prepared
to meet such changes, though aware of many in myself.

I cannot allude to any now, except the railway, which was the first I
had seen, and whose line to our very town, almost to our very house,
had been not six months completed. I shall never forget the effect,
nor has it ever left me when I travel; I cannot find it monotonous,
nor anything but marvel. It was certainly evening when I entered the
stupendous terminus, and nothing could have so adapted itself to the
architecture as the black-gray gloom, lamp-strung, streaming with
gas-jets.

Such gloom breathed deadly cold, presaging the white storm or the
icing wind; and it was the long drear line itself that drew my spirit
forth, as itself lonely to bask in loneliness, such weird, wild
insecurity seemed hovering upon the darkened distance, such a dream of
hopeless achievement seemed the space to be overpassed that awful
evening. As I walked along the carriage-line I felt this, although the
engine-fire glowed furiously, and it spit out sparks in bravery; but
the murmur of exhaustless power prevented my feeling in full force
what that power must really be.

It was not until we rolled away and left the lamps in their ruddy sea
behind us, had lost ourselves far out in the dark country, had begun
to rush into the very arms of night, that I could even bear to
remember how little people had told me of what steam-travelling by
land would prove in my experience. It seemed to me as if I, too, ought
to have changed, and to carry wings; the spirit pined for an
enfranchisement of its own as peculiar, and recalled all painfully
that its pinings were in vain.

A thousand chapters have been expended upon the delights of return to
home, and a thousand more will probably insure for themselves laudable
publicity. I should be an all-ungrateful wretch if I refused my single
_Ave_ at that olden shrine. I cannot quite forget, either, that none
of my wildest recollections out-dazzled its near brightness as I
approached; the poetic isolation of my late life, precious as it was
in itself, and inseparable from my choicest appreciation, seeming but
to enhance the genial sweetness of the reality in my reception.

Long before I arrived in that familiar parlor a presence awaited me
which had ever appeared to stand between my actual and my ideal
world,--it was that of my brother and earliest friend, dear Lenhart
Davy, who had walked out into the winter night expressly and entirely
to meet me, and who was so completely unaged, unchanged, and unalloyed
that I could but wonder at the freshness of the life within him, until
I remembered the fountains where it fed. He was as bright, as earnest,
as in the days of my infant faith; but there was little to be said
until we arrived at home.

Cold as was the season, and peculiarly susceptible as our family has
ever been to cold, the street-door positively stood ajar! and hiding
behind it was Margareth, oblivious of rheumatism and frost, to receive
her nursling. When she had pronounced upon my growth her enchanted
eulogy that I was taller than ever and more like myself, I was dragged
into the parlor by Davy, and found them all, the bloom of the
firelight restoring their faces exactly as I had left them. My mother,
as I told her, looked younger than myself,--which might easily be the
case, as I believe I was born grown up,--and Clo was very handsome in
her fashion, wearing the old pictorial raiment. My sister Lydia had
lately received preferment, and introduced me on the instant to her
prospects,--a gentlemanly individual upon the sofa, who had not even
concluded his college career, but was in full tilt for high
mathematical honors at that which I have heard called Oxford's rival,
but upon whose merit as a residence and Academe celestial I am not
competent to sit in judgment.

These worthies dismissed, I was at liberty to spend myself upon the
most precious of the party. They were Millicent and her baby, which
last I had never seen,--a lady of eighteen months, kept thus late out
of her cradle that she, too, might greet her uncle. She was a
delicious child,--I have never found her equal,--and had that
indescribable rarity of appearance which belongs, or we imagine it to
belong, to an only one. Carlotta--so they had christened her after
unworthy me--was already calling upon my name, to the solemn ecstasy
of Davy, and his wife's less sustained gratification.

I have never really seen such a sight as that sister and brother of
mine, with that only child of theirs. When we drew to the table,
gloriously spread for supper, and my mother, in one of her
old-fashioned agonies, implored for Carlotta to be taken upstairs,
Davy, perfectly heedless, brought her along with him to his chair,
placed on his knee and fed her, fostered her till she fell asleep and
tumbled against his shoulder, when he opened his coat-breast for her
and just let her sleep on,--calling no attention to her beauties in so
many words, certainly, but paying very little attention to anything
else; and at last, when we all retired, carrying her away with him
upstairs, where I heard him walking up and down his room, with a
hushing footstep, long after I had entered mine.

It was not until the next morning that I was made fully aware of
Davy's position. After breakfast, as soon as the sun was high enough
to prepare the frosty atmosphere for the reception of the baby, I
returned with Millicent and himself to their own home. I had been
witness to certain improvements in that little droll house, but a
great deal more had been done since my last visit.

For example, there was a room downstairs, built out, for the books,
which had accumulated too many; and over this room had Davy designed a
very sweet green-house, to be approached from the parlor itself. The
same order overlaid everything; the same perfume of cleanliness
permeated every corner; and it was just as well this was the case, so
jammed and choked up with all sorts of treasures and curiosities were
the little landing-place, the tiny drawing-room, the very bed-room and
_a half_, as Davy called my own little closet, with the little carven
bed's head. Everywhere his shadow, gliding and smiling silently,
though at the proper time she had plenty to say too, came Millicent
after him. Nor was the baby ever far behind; for at the utmost
distance might be glimpsed a nest of basket-work, lined with
blush-color, placed on a chair or two among the geraniums and myrtles,
and in that basket the baby lay; while her mamma, who only kept one
servant, made various useful and ornamental progresses through the
house.

While Davy was at home, however, Carlotta was never out of his arms,
or, at least, off his lap; she had learned to lie quite quiescently
across his knees while he wrote or read, making no more disturbance
than a dove would have done. I believe he was half-jealous because
when I took her she did not cry, but began to put her fingers into my
eyes and to carry my own fingers to her mouth. This morning we had her
between us when we began to talk, and it was with his eyes upon her
that Davy first said,--

"Well, Charles, you have told me nothing of your plans yet; I suppose
they are hardly formed."

"Oh, yes! quite formed,--at least as formed as they can be without
your sanction. You know what you wrote to me about,--your last
letter?"

"You received that extemporaneous extravaganza, then, Charles,--which
I afterwards desired I had burned?"

"I take that as especially unkind on your part, as I could not but
enter with the most eager interest into every line."

"Not unkind, though I own it was a little cowardly. I felt rather awed
in submitting my ideas to you when you were at the very midst of music
in its most perfect exposition."

"Oh! I did not quite discover that, Lenhart. There are imperfections
everywhere, and will be, in such a mixed multitude as of those who
press into the service of what is altogether perfect."

"The old story, Charlie."

"Rather the new one. I find it every day placed before me in a
stronger light; but it has not long held even with me. How very little
we can do, even at the utmost, and how very hard we must labor even to
do that little!"

"I am thankful to hear you say so, Charles, coming fresh from the
severities of study; but we are some few of us in the same mind."

"Then let us hold together; and this brings me to my purpose. I am not
going to settle in London, Lenhart,--that is a mistake of yours. I
will never leave you while I can be of any use."

"Leave me, Charlie? Ah! would that I could cherish the possibility of
your remaining here! But with your power and your promise of success,
who would not blame those who should prevent your appearance in
London?"

"I will never make my appearance anywhere, my dearest brother,--at
least not as you intend. I could have no objection to play anywhere if
I were wanted, and if any one cared to hear me; but I will never give
up the actual hold I have on this place. As much may be done here as
anywhere else, and more, I am certain, than in London. There is more
room here,--less strain and stress; and, once more, I will not leave
you."

"But how, my Charlie,--in what sense?"

"I will work along with you, and for you, while I work for myself. I
am young, very young, and, I daresay, very presumptuous in believing
myself equal to the task; but I should wish, besides being resident
professor, to devote myself especially to the organization of that
band of which you wrote, and which in your letter you gave me to
understand it is your desire to amalgamate with your class. You do not
see, Lenhart, that, young as I am, nothing could give me a position
like this, and that if I fail, I can but return to a less ambitious
course."

"There is no course, Charles, that I do not consider you equal to; but
I cannot reconcile it with my conscience to bind you to a service so
signal for my own sake,--it is a mere sketch of a Spanish castle I had
reared in an idle hour."

"We will raise a sure fame on solid foundations, Lenhart, and I do not
care about fame for its own sake. After all, you cannot, with your
musical electicism, prefer me to become mixed up in the horrible
struggle for precedence which, in London, degrades the very nature of
art, and renders its pursuit a misnomer."

"You have not given up one of your old prejudices, Charles."

"No, Davy. I feel we can do more acting together than either
separately, for the cause we love best and desire to serve. You know
me well, and that, whatever I have learned in my life abroad, no taste
is so dear to me as yours,--no judgment I should follow to the death
so gladly. Besides all the rest, which is made up of a good deal more
than one can say, I could never consent, as an instrumentalist, and as
holding that instrument to be part of myself, to infect my style with
whims and fashions which alone would render it generally acceptable. I
_must_ reserve what I musically believe as my musical expression, and
nothing can satisfy me in that respect but the development of the
orchestra."

"Poor orchestra! it is a very germ, a winter-seed at present, my
ever-sanguine Charlie."

"I am not sanguine; on the contrary, I am disposed to suspect
treachery everywhere, even in myself, and certainly in you, if you
would have me go to London, take fashionable lodgings, and starve
myself on popular precedents, among them that most magnificent one of
lionizing musical professors. No, I could not bear that, and no one
would care a whit for my playing as I _feel_. I should be starved out
and out. If you can initiate me a little yourself into your
proceedings, I think I shall be able to persuade you that I ought to
be only where my impulse directs me to remain."

Davy at this juncture deprived me of the baby, who had been munching
my finger all the time we talked; and when he had placed her in her
nest,--a portent of vast significance,--he enlightened me indeed to
the full, and we informed Millicent when she came upstairs; for
nothing could be done without asking her accord. It was greatly to my
satisfaction that she entirely agreed with me, and a great relief to
Davy, who in the plenitude of his delicate pride could hardly bear the
thought of suggesting anything to anybody, lest his suggestion should
unsteady any fixed idea of their own. Millicent cordially asserted
that she felt there was a more interesting sphere about them than she
could imagine to exist anywhere else; and perhaps she was right, for
no one could sufficiently laud the extirpation of ancient prejudices
by Davy's firm voice and ardent heart. I could not possibly calculate
at that moment the force and extent of his singular efforts, and their
still more unwonted effects in so short a time made manifest. I heard
of these from Millicent, who could talk of nothing else, to me, at
least, after Davy, ever anxious, had left us for his morning's
lessons, which occupied him in private, though not much more than
formerly, as his peculiar attention and nearly his whole time were
devoted more determinately than ever to the instruction and elevation
of the vocal institution he had organized.

"No one can tell, Charles," said Millicent, among other things, "how
heroically and patiently he has worked, rejecting all but the barest
remuneration, to bring all forward as he has succeeded in doing, and
has nobly done. You will say so when you hear, and you must hear,
to-morrow evening."

"I shall indeed feel strange, Millicent," I replied, "to sit at his
feet once more, and to feel again all that went through me in the days
when I learned of him alone. But I am very curious about another
friend of mine. I suppose you can tell me just as well as he."

"About Miss Benette, Charles?"

"Yes, and also little Laura."

"I know nothing; we know nothing of her or what she has been doing.
But you must have heard of Clara?"

"Not a word. I have been very quiet, I assure you."

"So much the better for you, Charles. But she has not lost your good
opinion?"

"She would have that wherever she went."

"I believe it. My husband has, of course, never lost sight of her; yet
it was not until the other day, and quite by accident, that we heard
of all she has become. A very old Italian stager, Stelli by name,
called on Lenhart the other day at the class, and after hearing
several of the pieces, asked him whether his pupil, Miss Benette, had
not belonged to it once on a time. He said, Yes; and finding that the
signor was acquainted with her, brought him home to dinner; and we
were told a great deal that it is very difficult to tell, even to you,
Charles. She must, however, be exactly what you always imagined."

"I should not only imagine, but expect, she will remain unaltered. I
do not believe such eyes could change, or the owner of such eyes."

"He says just so,--he says that she is an angel; he continued to call
her _angela_, _angela_, and could call her nothing else."

"Is she singing in Italy just now?"

"It is just that we asked him. You know she went to Italy for study,
and no one heard a word about her; she did not omit to write, but
never mentioned what she was doing. Only the third year she sent us
news of her _début_. This was but last May. The news was in a paper,
not in her letter. In her letter she only spoke of ourselves, and sent
us a present for baby,--such a piece of work, Charles, as you never
saw. I thought she would have quite given up work by that time. The
letter was a simple, exquisite expression of regard for her old
master; and when Lenhart answered it, she wrote again. _This_ letter
contained the most delicate intimation of her prosperous views. She
was entirely engaged at that time, but told us she trusted to come to
England an early month next year, for she says she finds, having been
to Italy, she loves England best."

"That is rather what I should have expected. She had not an Italian
touch about her; she would weary there."

"I should scarcely think so, Charles, for Stelli described her beauty
as something rose-like and healthful,--'fresher than your infant
there,' he said, pointing to baby; and from her style of singing grand
and sacred airs, she has been fancifully named, and is called
everywhere, 'La Benetta benedetta.'"[7]

"That strikes home to me very pleasantly, Millicent. She had something
blessed and infantine in her very look. I admire that sobriquet; but
those usually bestowed by the populace are most unmeaning. Her own
name, however, suits her best,--it is limpid like the light in her
eyes. There is no word so apt as 'clear' for the expression of her
soul. And what, Millicent, of her voice and style?"

"Something wonderful, no doubt, Charles, if she obtained an engagement
in the midst of such an operatic pressure as there was this year. I
hope she will do something for England too. We have not so many like
her that we can afford to lose her altogether."

"I know of not one, Millicent; and shall, if it be my good fortune to
see her, persuade her not to desert us; but Lenhart will have more
chance."

"La Benetta benedetta!" I could not forget it; it haunted me like the
words of some chosen song; I was ever singing it in my mind; it seemed
the most fitting, and the only not irreverent homage with which one
could have strewed the letters of her name,--a most successful
hieroglyph. Nor the less was I reminded of her when, on the following
evening, I accompanied my sister--who for once had allowed Clo to take
charge of her baby--to the place, now so altered since I left it,
where the vocal family united. We entered at the same door, we
approached the same room; but none could again have known it unless,
as in my case, he could have pointed out the exact spot on which he
had been accustomed to sit. The roof was raised, the rafters were
stained that favorite sylvan tint of Davy's, the windows lightly
pencilled with it upon their ground-glass arches, the walls painted
the softest shade of gray, harmonizing perfectly with the
purple-crimson tone of the cloth that covered seats and platform.
Alas! as I surveyed that platform I felt, with Davy, how much room
there was for increased and novel yet necessary organism in the
perfectibility of the system; for on that glowing void outspread,
where his slight, dark form and white face and _glancing_ hands alone
shone out, I could but dream of beholding the whole array, in
clustering companionship, of those mystic shapes that suggest to us,
in their varied yet according forms, the sounds that creep, that wind,
that pierce, that electrify, through parchment or brass or string.

In a word, they wanted a band very much. It would not have signified
whether they had one or not, had the class continued in its primitive
position, and in which its enemies would have desired it to
remain,--an unprogressive mediocrity. But as it is the nature of true
art to be progressive ever, it is just as ignorant to expect
shortcomings of a true artist as it would be vain to look for ideal
success amongst the leaders of musical taste, neither endowed with
aspiration nor volition. Now, to hear those voices rise, prolong
themselves, lean in uncorrupted tone upon the calm motet, or rest in
unagitated simplicity over a pause of Ravenscroft's old heavenly
verses, made one almost leap to reduce such a host to the service of
an appropriate band, and to institute orchestral worship there. I
could but remind myself of certain great works, paradises of musical
creation, from whose rightful interpretation we are debarred either by
the inconsistency with the chosen band of the selected chorus, or by
the inequality of the band itself. It struck me that a perfect dream
might here be realized in full perfection, should my own capabilities,
at least, keep pace with the demand upon them, were I permitted to
take my part in Davy's plan as we had treated of it to each other. I
told him, as we walked home together, a little of my mind. He was in
as bright spirits as at his earliest manhood; it was a favorable
moment, and in the keen December moonlight we made a vow to stand by
each other then and ever.

Delightful as was the task, and responsive to my inmost resolutions,
the final result I scarcely dared anticipate; it was no more easy at
first than to trace the source of such a river as the Nile. Many
difficulties darkened the way before me; and my own musical knowledge
seemed but as a light flung immediately out of my own soul, making the
narrow circle of a radiance for my feet that was unavailable for any
others. My position as Davy's brother-in-law gave me a certain hold
upon my pupils, but no one can imagine what suffering they weetlessly
imposed upon me. The number I began with, receiving each singly, not
at my own home, but in a hired room, was not more than eight, amateurs
and neophytes either,--the amateurs esteeming themselves no less than
amateurs, and something more; the neophytes chiefly connections of the
choral force, and of an individual stubbornness not altogether to be
appreciated at an early period. I could laugh to remember myself those
awful mornings when, after a breakfast at home which I could not have
touched had it been less delicately prepared, I used to repair to that
room of mine and await the advent of those gentlemen, all older than
myself except one, and he the most _presto_ in pretensions of the set.
The room was at the back and top of a house; and over the swinging
window-blind I could discern a rush now and then of a deep dark smoke,
and a wail, as of a demon sorely tried, would shrill along my nerves
as the train dashed by. The trains were my chief support during the
predominance of my ordeal,--they superinduced a sensation that was
neither of music nor of stolidity.

After a month or two, however, dating from the first week of February,
when, together with the outpeering of the first snowdrop from the
frost, I assumed my dignities, I discovered that I had gained a
certain standing, owing to the fact of my being aware what I was
about, and always attending to the matter in hand. Of my senior
pupils, one was immensely conversable, so conversable that until he
had disgorged himself of a certain quantity of chat, it was impossible
to induce him to take up his bow; another contemplative, so
contemplative that I always had to unpack his instrument for him, and
to send it after him when he was gone, in a general way; a third so
deficient in natural musicality that he did not like my playing! and
soon put up for a vacant oboe in the band of the local theatre, and
left me in the lurch. But desperately irate with them as I was, and
almost disgusted with my petty efforts, I made no show of either to
Davy, nor did they affect my intentions nor stagger my fixed
assurance. All my experiences were hoarded and husbanded by me to such
purpose on my own account that I advanced myself in exact proportion
to the calm _statu quo_ in which remained at present my orchestral
nucleus. My patience was rewarded, however, before I could have dared
to hope, by a steady increase of patronage during April and May,--in
fact, I had so much to do in the eight weeks of those two months that
my mother declared I was working too hard, and projected a trip for me
somewhere. Bless her ever benignant heart! she always held that
everybody, no matter who, and no matter what they had to do, should
recreate during three months out of every twelve! How my family, all
celebrated as they were for nerves of salient self-assertion, endured
my home-necessary practice, I cannot divine; but they one and all made
light of it, even declaring they scarcely heard that all-penetrating
sound distilled down the staircase and through closed parlor doors.
But I was obliged to keep in my own hand most vigorously, and
sustained myself by the hope that I should one day lead off my
dependants in the region now made sacred by voice and verse alone. It
was my habit to give no lessons after dinner, but to pursue my own
studies, sadly deficient as I was in too many respects, in the long
afternoons of spring, and to walk in the lengthening evenings, more
delicious in my remembrance than any of my boyish treasure-times. On
class-nights I would walk to Davy's, find him in a paroxysm of
anxiety just gone off, leaving Millicent to bemoan his want of
appetite and to devise elegant but inexpensive suppers. I would have
one good night-game with my soft-lipped niece, watch her mamma
unswathe the cambric from her rosy limbs, see the white lids drop
their lashes over her blue eyes' sleepfulness, listen to the breath
that arose like the pulses of a flower to the air, feel her sweetness
make me almost sad, and creep downstairs most noiselessly. Millicent
would follow me to fetch her work-basket from the little conservatory,
would talk a moment before she returned upstairs to work by the
cradle-side, would steal with me to the door, look up to the stars or
the moon a moment, and heave a sigh,--a sigh as from happiness too
large for heart to hold; and I, having picked my path around the
narrow gravel, smelling the fresh mould in the darkness, having
reached the gate, would just glance round to sign adieu; and not till
then would she withdraw into the warm little hall and close the door.
Then off I was to the class, to see the windows a-glow from the
street, to hear the choral glory greeting me in sounds like chastened
organ-tones, to mount, unquestioned, into the room, to find the
crimsoned seats all full, the crimson platform bare, save of that
quick, dark form and those gleaming hands. I sit down behind, and bask
luxuriously in that which, to me, is precious as "the sunshine to the
bee;" or I come down stoopingly a few steps, and taking the edge of a
bench where genial faces smile for me, I peep over the sheet of the
pale mechanic or rejoicing weaver, whose visage is drawn out of its
dread fatigue as by a celestial galvanism, and join in the psalm, or
mix my spirit in the soaring antiphon. Davy meets me afterwards; we
wait until everybody has passed out, we pack away the books, we turn
down the gas,--or at least a gentleman does, who appears to think it
an essential part of music that a supreme bustle should precede and
follow its celebrations, and who, locking the door after we attain the
street, tenders Davy the key in a perfect agony of courteous
patronage, and bows almost unto the earth. I accompany my brother
home, and Millicent and he and I sup together, the happiest trio in
the town. On other nights I sup at home, and after my walk, as I come
in earlier, and after I have given reports of Millicent and her spouse
and the baby,--also, whether it has been out this day (my mother
having a righteous prejudice against certain winds),--I sometimes play
to them such moving melodies as I fancy will touch them, but not too
deeply, and indulge in the lighter moods that music does not deny,
even to the uninitiated,--often trifling with my memory of old times as
they begin to seem to me, and, alas! have seemed many years already,
though I am young,--so young that I scarcely know yet how young I am.

FOOTNOTE:

[7] The blessed Benette.




CHAPTER X.


I was in the most contented frame of mind that can be conceived of
until the very May month of the year I speak of, when my sensations,
as usual, began to be peculiar. I don't think anybody can love summer
better than I do, can more approvedly languish out, by heavy-shaded
stream in an atmosphere all roses, the summer noons, can easier spend,
in _insomnie_ the lustrous moony nights.

But May does something to me of which I am not aware during June and
July, or at the first delicate spring-time. When the laburnums rain
their gold, and the lilacs toss broad-bloomed their grape-like
clusters, when the leaves, full swelling, are yet all veined with
light, I cannot very well work hard, and would rather slave the
livelong eleven months besides, to have that month a holiday. So it
happened now; and though I had no absolute right to leave my pupils
and desert the first stones of my musical masonry just laid and
smoothed, I was obliged to think that if I were to have a holiday at
all, I had better take it then. But I had not decided until I received
a double intimation,--one from Davy, and one from the county
newspaper, which last never chronicled events that stirred in London
unless they stirred beyond it. My joyous brother brought me the
letter, and the paper was upon our table the same morning when I came
down to breakfast.

"See here, Charles," said Clo, who, sitting in her own corner, over
her own book, was unwontedly excited; "here is a piece of news for
you, and my mother found it first!"

I read, in a castaway paragraph enough, that the Chevalier Seraphael,
the pianist and composer, was to pay a visit to England this very
summer; though to remain in strict seclusion, he would not be
inaccessible to professors. He brought with him, I learned, "the
fruits of several years' solitary travel, no doubt worthy of his
genius and peculiar industry."

Extremely to the purpose were these expressions, for they told me all
I wanted to know,--that he was alive, must be himself again, and had
been writing for those who loved him,--for men and angels. Now, for my
letter. I had held it without opening it, for I chose to do so when
alone, and waited until after breakfast. It was a choice little
supplement to that choicest of all invites for my spirit and heart,--a
note on foreign paper; the graceful, firm character of the writing
found no difficulty to stand out clear and black from that
milk-and-water hue and spongy texture. It was from Clara,--a simple
form that a child might have dictated, yet containing certain business
reports for Davy, direct as from one who could master even business.

She was coming definitely to England, not either for any purposes save
those all worthy of herself; she had accepted, after much
consideration, a London engagement for the season; and, said she,--

"I only have my fears lest I should do less than I ought for what I
love best; it is so difficult to do what is right by music in these
times, when it is fashionable to seem to like it. You will give me a
little of your advice, dear sir, if I need it, as perhaps I may; but
I hope not, because I have troubled you too much already. I trust
your little daughter is growing like you to please her mother, and
like her mother to please you. I shall be delighted to see it when I
come to London, if you can allow me to do so."

The style of this end of a letter both amused and absorbed me; it was
Clara's very idiosyncrasy. I could but think, "Is it possible that she
has not altered more than her style of expressing herself has done? I
must go and see."

Davy received my ravings with due compassion and more indulgence than
I had dared to hope. The suspension of my duties, leaving our
orchestra in limbo still longer, disconcerted him a little; but he was
the first to say I must surely go to London. The only thing to be
discovered was when to go, so as not to frustrate either one of my
designs or the other; and I declared he must, to that end, address
Clara on the very subject.

He did so, and in a fortnight there came the coolest note to say she
would be in London the next day, and that she had heard the great
musician would arrive before the end of the month. I inly marvelled
whether in all the course of his wanderings Clara and the Chevalier
had met; but still I thought and prophesied not. I was really
reluctant to leave Davy with his hands and head full, that I might
saunter with my own in kid-gloves, and swarming with May fancies; but
for once my selfishness--or something higher, whose mortal frame is
selfishness--impelled me. I found myself in the train at the end of
the next week, carrying Clara's address in my memorandum-book, and my
violin-case in the carriage along with me.

It was early afternoon, and exquisitely splendid weather when I
arrived in London. In London, however, I had little to do just then,
as the address of the house to which I was bound was rather out of
London,--above the smoke, beyond the stir, at the very first plunge
into the surrounding country that lingers yet as a dream upon her day
reality, with which dreams suit not ill, and from which they seldom
part. I love the heart of London, in whose awful deeps reflect the
mysterious unfathomable of every secret, and where the homeless are
best at home, where the home-bred fear not to wander, assured of sweet
return; but I do not love its immediate precincts,--the rude waking
stage between that profound and the conserved, untainted sylvan
vision, that, once overpast it, dawns upon us.

Dashing as abruptly as possible, and by the nearest way through all
the brick wilderness outward, I reached in no long weary time, and by
no long weary journey, though on foot, a quiet road, which by a
continuous but gentle rise carried me to the clustered houses, neither
quite hamlet nor altogether village, where Miss Benette had hidden her
heart among the leaves.

Cool and shady was the side I took, though the sunshine whitened the
highway, and every summer promise beamed from the soft sky's azure,
the green earth's bloom. The painted gates I met at intervals, or the
iron-wreathed portals, guarded dim walks, through whose perspective
villas glistened, all beautiful as they were discerned afar in their
frames of tossing creepers, with gay verandas or flashing
green-houses. But the wall I followed gave me not a transient glimpse
of gardens inwards, so thickly blazed the laburnums and the paler
flames of the rich acacia, not to speak of hedges all sweet-brier,
matted into one embrace with double-blossomed hawthorn. I passed
garden after garden and gate after gate, seeing no one; for the great
charm of those regions consists in the extreme privacy of every
habitation,--privacy which the most exclusive nobleman might envy, and
never excel in his wilderness parks or shrubberies; and when at length
I attained the summit of the elevation where two roads met and shut in
a sweep of actual country, and I came to the end of the houses, I
began to look about for some one to direct me; then, turning the
corner, I came in turning upon what I had been seeking, without having
really sought it by any effort.

The turn in the road I speak of went tapering off between hedgerows;
and meadow-lands, as yet unencroached upon, swept within them as far
as I could see. But just where I stood, a cottage, older than any of
the villas, and framed in shade more ancient than the light groves I
left behind me, peeped from the golden and purple May-trees across a
moss-green lawn,--a perfect picture in its silence, and a very
paradise of fragrance. It was built of wood, and had its roof-hung
windows and drooping eaves protected by a spreading chestnut-tree,
whose great green fans beat coolness against every lattice, and whose
blossoms had kindled their rose-white tapers at the sun. The garden
was so full of flowers that one could scarcely bear the sweetness,
except that the cool chestnut shadow dashed the breeze with freshness
as it swept the heavy foliage and sank upon the checkered grass to a
swoon. I was not long lost in contemplating the niche my saint had
chosen, for I could have expected nothing fitter; but I was at some
loss to enter, for the reminiscences of my childhood burdened me, and
I dreaded lest I should be deprived of anything I now held stored
within me, by a novel shock of being. I need not have feared.

After waiting till I was ashamed, I opened the tiny gate and walked
across the grass, still soft with the mowing of the morning, to the
front door, where I pulled a little bell-handle half smothered in the
wreaths of monthly roses that were quivering and fluttering like pink
doves about the door and lower windows. This was as it should be, the
very door-bell dressed with flowers; but more as it should be, it was
that Thoné opened the door. I was almost ready to disappear again, but
that her manner was the most reassuring to troublesome nerves. She did
not appear to have any idea who I was, nor did she even stare when I
presented my card, but like some strange bronze escaped from its
pedestal, and attired in muslin, she conducted me onwards down a
little low hall, half filled with the brightest plants, into a double
parlor, whose folding-doors were closed, and whose diamond-paned back
window looked out far, and very far, into the country.

Hearing not a voice in the next room, nor any rustle, nor even a soft
foot hastily cross the beamed ceiling overhead, I dared look about me
for a moment, hid my hat in confusion under a chair, saw that the
round table had a bowl of flowers in its centre, caught sight of my
face in the intensely polished glass-door of a small closed book-case,
and, as if detected in some act, walked away to the window.

I could not have done a better thing to prepare myself for any fresh
excitement; I was ready in an instant to weep with joy at the beauty
that flooded my spirit. Over and beyond the garden I gazed; it did not
detain my eye,--I passed its tree-tops, all apple-bloom and lilac, and
its sudden bursts of grass where the tree-tops parted. I looked out to
the country,--an undulating country, a sea of green, flushed here and
there with a bloomy level, or a breeze upon the crimson clover;
odorous bean-fields quivered, and their scent was floating
everywhere,--it drowned the very garden sweetness, and blended in with
waftures of unknown fragrance, all wild essences shed from woodbines,
from dog-roses, and the new-cut grass, or plumy meadow-sweet, by the
waters of rills flowing up into the distance, silver in the sunlight.
Soft hills against the heaven swept over visionary valleys; the
sunshine lay white and warm upon glistening summer seas and picture
cottages; over all spread the purple, melting, brooding sky,
transparent on every leaf and blossom, shining upon those tender
sloping hills with an amethyst haze of light, not shade.

As I stood, the things that seemed had never been, and the things that
had been grew dilated and indefinitely bright,--the soft thrall of the
suspense that bound me intertwining itself with mine "electric chain"
as that May-dream mixed itself with all my music, veiling it as
moonlight, the colors of the flowers, or as music itself veils
passion.

I waited quite half an hour, and had lost myself completely, feeling
as if no change could come, when, without a sound, some one entered
behind me. I knew it by the light that burst through the folding-door,
which had, however, again closed when I turned, for the tread was so
silent I might otherwise have gone dreaming on. Clara stood before me,
so little altered that I could have imagined that she had been put
away in a trance when I left her last, and but this instant was
restored to me.

She was not more womanly, nor less child-like; and for her being an
actress, it seemed a thing impossible. I could but stand and gaze; nor
did she seem surprised, nor did her eyes droop, nor her fair cheek
mantle: through the untrembling lashes I caught the crystal light as
she opposed me, still waiting for me to speak.

I was heartily ashamed at last, and resolved to make her welcome as
she maintained that strange regard. I put out my hand, and in an
instant she greeted me; the infantine smile shone suddenly that had
soothed me so long ago.

"I am very glad to see you, Miss Benette. It was very kind of you to
let me come."

"By no means," she replied, with the slightest possible Italian
softening of her accent. "I am very much obliged to you, and I am very
pleased also. Please sit down, sir, for you have been standing, I am
afraid, a long time. I was out at first, and since I returned I made
haste; but still, I fear, I have kept you waiting."

"I could have waited all day, Miss Benette, to see such a window as
this. How did you manage to put your foot into such a nest?"

"It is a very sweet little place, and the country is most beautiful. I
don't know what they mean by its being too near London. I must be near
London, and yet I could not exactly live in it, for it makes me idle."

"How very strange! It has the same effect upon me,--that is to say, I
always dream in those streets, and lose half my purpose. Still, it
must be almost a temptation to indulge a certain kind of idleness
here; in such a garden as that, for example, one could pass all one's
time."

"I do pass half my time in the garden, and yet I do not think it is
too much, for it makes me well; and I cannot work when I am not
well,--I was always unfortunate in that respect."

"How do you think I look, by the by, Miss Benette? Am I very much
changed? It is perhaps, however, not a safe question."

"Quite safe, sir. You have grown more and more like your inseparable
companion,--you always had a look of it, and now it takes the place of
all other expression."

"I don't know whether that is complimentary or not, you see, for I
never heard your opinion in old times. I was a very silly boy then,
and not quite so well aware of what I owed to you as I may be now."

"I do not feel that you owe anything to anybody, Mr. Auchester, for
you would have gone to your own desires as resolutely through peril as
through pleasure; at all events, if you are still as modest as you
were, it is a great blessing now you have become a soul which bears so
great a part. If I must speak truth, however, about your looks, you
seem as delicate as you used to be, and I do not suppose you could be
anything else. You have not altered except to have grown up."

"And you, if I may say so, have not altered in growing up."

Nor had she. She had not gained an inch in height. She could never
have worn that black silk frock those years; yet the folds, so grave
and costly, still shielded her gentle breast to meet the snow-soft
ruffle that fringed her throat: nor had she ornament upon
her,--neither bracelet nor ring upon the dimpled hands, the delicate
wrists. Though her silken hair had lengthened into wreaths upon
wreaths behind, she still preserved those baby-curls upon her temples,
nor had a shade more majesty gathered to her brow,--the regal
innocence was throned there, and looked forth from her eyes as from a
shrine; but it was evident that there was nothing about her from head
to foot on which she piqued herself,--a rare shortcoming of feminine
maturity. The only perceptible difference in the face was when she
spoke or smiled; and then the change, the deepened sweetness, can be
no more given to description than the notion of music to the destitute
ear. It was something of a reserve too inward to be approached, and
too subtile to subdue its own influence,--like perfume from unseen
flowers diffusing itself when the wind awakens, while we know neither
whence the windy fragrance comes nor whither it flows.

"Is it possible, Miss Benette," I continued,--for I forced myself
absolutely to speak; I should so infinitely have preferred to watch
her silently,--"that you can have passed through so much since I saw
you?"

"No, I have lived a very quiet life; it is you who have lived in all
the stir until you fancy there is not any calm at all."

"I should have certainly found calm here. But you, I thought, and
indeed I know, have had every kind of excitement ready made to your
hand, and only waiting for you to touch the springs."

"I have had no excitement till I came here."

"None? Why, who could have had more, and who could have borne the same
so bravely? We have heard of you here, and it must have been a
transcending tempest for the shock to echo so far."

"I do not call singing in theatres, and acting, excitement. I always
felt cool and collected in them, for I knew they were not real, and
that I should get through them soon, and very glad should I be; so I
was patient and did my best. You look at me shocked. I knew I should
shock you after all our talk."

"Oh, fie! Miss Benette, to talk so, then, and to shock yourself, as
you must, if you are faithless."

"Poor I, faithless! Well, I am not important enough for it to signify.
And yet I should like to tell you what I mean, because you were always
kind to me, and I should not wish you to despise me now. No, Mr.
Auchester, I am not faithless; I love music more and more; it is the
form of my religion; I dare to call it altogether holy,--I am sure,
indeed, it must be so, or it would have been trodden long ago into
nothing with the evil they have heaped over it to hide it, and the
mistakes they have made about it. I act and I sing, because that is
what I can do best; but my idea of music goes with yours, and
therefore I am not excited as I should be, if I were filling up a
place such as that which you fill; though I would not leave my own for
any consideration, and hope to continue in it. My excitement since I
came here, where most ladies would be dull or sick, has arisen from
the feeling that I am brought into contact with what is most like
music, as I always find solitude, and also because since I came I have
been raised higher by several spirits which are lofty in their
desires, instead of being dragged through a mass of all opinions as I
was abroad. My pleasures here are so great that I feel my soul to be
quite young again, and to grow younger; and you cannot fancy what it
is to return here after being in London, because you do not go to
London, and if you did go to London, you would not do as I do."

She turned to me here, and told me it was her dinner-hour, asking me
to remain and dine with her. It was about two o'clock, and I hesitated
not to stay,--indeed, I know not that I could have gone.

We arose together, and I led her forward. We crossed the hall to a
door beyond us, when, removing her little hand from my arm, and laying
it on the lock, she looked into my face and smiled.

"You remembered me so well that I hope you will remember an old friend
of mine who is staying here with me."

Before I could reply, or even marvel, she opened the door, and we
entered. The little dining-room was lined with warmer hues than the
airy drawing-room, but white muslin curtains made sails within the
crimson ones, and some person stood within these, lightly screened,
and looking out over the blind.

"Laura," said Miss Benette, and she turned with exquisite elegance.
Had it not been for her name, which touched my memory, I could not
have remembered her,--certainly, at least, not then.

Perhaps, when we were seated opposite at table, with nothing between
us but a vase of garden flowers, I might have made out her lineaments;
but I was called upon by my reminding chivalry to assist the hostess
in the dissection of spring chickens and roasted lamb, and there was
something besides about that very Laura I did not like to face until
she should at least speak and reveal herself, as by the voice one
cannot fail to do.

However she spoke not, nor did Clara speak to her, though we two
talked a good deal,--that is to say, _I_ talked, as so it behooved me
to behave, and as I wished to see Miss Benette eat. When, at last, all
traces of the snowy damask were swept out by a pair of careful hands,
and we were left alone with the cut decanters, the early strawberries,
and sweet summer oranges, I did determine to look, for fear Miss
Lemark should think I did not dare to do so. I was not mistaken, as it
happened, in believing her to be quite capable of this construction,
as I discovered on regarding her immediately.

Her childish nonchalance had ripened into a hauteur quite alarming;
for though she was scarcely my own age, she might have been ten years
older. Not that her form was not lithe,--lithe as it could be to be
endowed with the proper complement of muscles,--but for a certain
sharpness of outline her countenance would have been languid in
repose; her brow retained its singular breadth, but had not gained in
elevation; her eyes were large and lambent, fringed with lashes that
swept her cheek, though not darker than her hair, which waved as the
willow in slightly-turned tresses to her waist. That waist was so
extremely slight that it scarcely looked natural, and yet was entirely
so, as was evident from the way she moved in her clothes.

She afforded a curious contrast to Clara in her black silk robe, for
she was dressed in muslin of the deepest rose-color, with an immense
skirt, its trimmings lace entirely, the sleeves dropped upon her arms,
which were loaded with bracelets of all kinds, while she wore a
splendid chain upon her neck. She bore this over effect very well, and
would not have become any other, it appeared to me, though there was
something faded in her appearance even then,--a want of color in her
aspect that demanded of costume the intensest contrasts.

"You have very much grown, Miss Lemark," I ventured to say, after I
had contemplated her to my satisfaction. She had, indeed, grown; she
was taller than I.

"So have you, Mr. Auchester."

"She has grown in many respects, Mr. Auchester, which you cannot
imagine," said Clara, with a winning mischief in her glance.

"I should imagine anything you pleased, I am afraid, Miss Benette, if
you inspired me. But I have been thinking it is a very curious thing
that we should meet in this way, we three alone, after meeting as we
did the first time in our lives."

"It was rather different then," exclaimed Laura, all abruptly, "and
the difference is, not that we are grown up, but that when we met on
the first occasion, we told each other our minds, and now we don't
dare."

"I am sure I dare," I retorted.

"No, you would not, no more would Clara; perhaps I might, but it would
be of no use."

"What did I say then that I dare not say now? I am sure I don't
remember."

"You may remember," said Clara, smiling; "I think it is hardly fair to
make _her_ remind you."

"It is my desert, if I remembered it first. You thought me very
vulgar, and you told me as much, though in more polite language."

"If I thought so then, I may be allowed to have forgotten it now, Miss
Lemark, as I think your friend will grant, when I look at you."

"You do not admire my style, Mr. Auchester; I know you,--it is
precisely against your taste. Even Clara does not approve of it, and
you have not half her forbearance,--if, indeed, you have any."

"Nobody, Laura dear, would dispute that you can bear more dressing
than I can; it does not suit me to wear colors, and you look like a
flower in them. Does not that color suit her well, Mr. Auchester?"

"Indeed I think so, and especially this glorious weather, when the
most vivid hues are starting out of every old stone. But Miss Lemark
could afford to wear green,--a very unusual suitability; it is the hue
of her eyes, I think."

Laura had looked down, with that hauteur more fixed than ever now the
light of her eyes was lost; she drew in the corners of her mouth, and
turned a shade colder, if not paler, in complexion. I could not
imagine what she was thinking, till she said, without raising her
eyes,--

"You know, Clara, that is not the reason you wear black and I do not.
You know that you look well in anything, because nobody looks at
anything you happen to wear. Besides, there is a reason I could give
if I chose."

"There is no other reason that you know of, Laura," she answered, and
then she asked me a question on quite another subject.

I was rather anxious to discover whether Laura had fulfilled her
destiny as far as we had compassed ours; but I did not find it easy,
for she scarcely spoke, and had not lost a certain abstraction in her
air that alienated the observer insensibly from her. After dinner
Clara rose, and I made some demonstration of going, which she met so
that I could not refuse her invitation to remain at least an hour or
two. We all three retired into the little drawing-room; Miss Benette
placed me a chair in the open window which I had admired, and herself
sat down opposite, easily as a child, and saying, "I will not be rude
to-day, as I used to be, in taking out my work whenever you came."

"It suited you very well, however, and I perceive, by your kind
present to my little niece, that you have not forgotten that delicate
art of yours."

"I had laid it aside, except to work for babies, some time, but it was
long since I had a baby to work for; and when Mr. Davy sent me word in
such joy that his little girl was born, I was so rejoiced to be able
to make caps and frocks."

"My sister was very much obliged to you on a former occasion too, Miss
Benette."

"Yes, I suppose she was very much obliged that I did not accept Mr.
Davy's hand, or would have been, only she did not know it!"

"I did not mean so. I was remembering whose handiwork graced her on
her marriage-day."

"Oh! I forgot the veil. I have made several since that one, but not
one like that exactly, because I desired that should be unique. You
have not told me, Mr. Auchester, anything about Seraphael and his
works."

I was so used to call him, and to hear him called, the Chevalier, that
at first I started, but was soon in a deep monologue of all that had
happened to me in connection with him and his music, only suppressing
that which I was in the habit of reserving, even in my own mind, from
my conscious self. In the midst of my relation, Laura, apparently
uninterested, as she had been seated in a chair with a book in her
hands, left the room, and we stayed in our talk and looked at each
other at the same instant.

"Why do you look so, Mr. Auchester?" said Clara, half amused, but with
a touch of perturbation too.

"I was expecting to be asked what I thought of that young lady, and
you see I was agreeably disappointed, for you are too well-bred to
ask."

"No such thing. I thought you would tell me yourself if you liked, but
that you might prefer not to do so, because you are not one, sir, to
assume critical airs over a person you have only seen a very few
hours."

"You do me more than justice, Miss Benette. But though I despair of
ever curing myself of the disposition to criticise, I am not
inconvertible. I admire Miss Lemark; she is improved, she is
distinguished,--a little more, and she would be lady-like."

"I thought 'lady-like' meant less than 'distinguished.' You make it
mean more."

"Perhaps I do mean that Miss Lemark is not exactly like yourself, and
that when she has lived with you a little longer, she will be indeed
all that she can be made."

"That would be foolish to say so,--pardon!--for she has lived with me
two years now, and has most likely taken as much from me by imitation
as she ever will, or by what you perhaps would call sympathy."

"I find, or should fancy I might find, to exist a great dissympathy
between you."

"I suppose 'dissympathy' is one of those nice little German words that
are used to express what nobody ought to say. I thought you would not
go there for nothing. If your dissympathy means not to agree in
sentiment, I do not know that any two bodies could agree quite in
feeling, nor would it be so pleasant as to be alone in some moods. I
should be very sorry never to be able to retreat into the cool shade,
and know that, as I troubled nobody, so nobody could get at me. Would
not you?"

"Oh! I suppose so, in the sense you mean. But how is it I have not
heard of this grace, or muse, taking leave to furl her wings at your
nest? I should have thought that Davy would have known."

"Should I tell Mr. Davy what I pay to Thoné for keeping my house in
order,--or whether I went to church on a Sunday? Laura and I always
agreed to live together, but we could not accomplish it until
lately,--I mean, since I was in Italy. We met then, as we said we
would. I carried her from Paris, where she was alone with every one
but those who should have befriended her; her father had died, and she
was living with Mademoiselle Margondret,--that person I did not like
when I was young. If I had known where Laura was, I should have
fetched her away before."

I felt for a moment as if I wished that Laura had never been born, but
only for one moment. I then resumed,--

"Does she not dance in London? She looks just ready for it."

"She has accepted no engagement for this season at present. I cannot
tell what she may do, however. Would you like to see my garden, Mr.
Auchester?"

"Indeed, I should very particularly like to see it, above all, if you
will condescend to accompany me. There is a great deal more that I
cannot help wishing for, Miss Benette; but I scarcely like to dream of
asking about it to-night."

"For me to sing? Oh! I will sing for you any time, but I would
certainly rather talk to you,--at least until the beautiful day begins
to go; and it is all bright yet."

She walked before me without her bonnet down the winding garden-steps;
the trellised balustrade was lost in rose-wreaths. We were soon in the
rustling air, among the flowers that had not a withered petal,
bursting hour by hour.

"It would tease you to carry flowers, Mr. Auchester, or I should be
tempted to gather a nosegay for you to take back to London. I cannot
leave them alone while they are so fresh, and they quite ask to be
gathered. Look at all the buds upon this bush,--you could not count
them."

"They are Provence roses. What a quantity you have!"

"Thoné chose this cottage for me because of the number of the flowers.
I believe she thinks there is some charm in flowers which will prevent
my becoming wicked! If you had been so kind as to bring your violin, I
would have filled up the case with roses, and then you would not have
had to carry them in your hands."

"But may I not have some, although I did not bring my violin? I never
think of anything but violets, though, for strewing that sarcophagus."

"Sarcophagus means 'tomb,' does it not? It is a fine idea of
resurrection, when you take out the sleeping music and make it live. I
know what you mean about violets,--their perfume is like the tones of
your instrument, and one can separate it from all other scents in the
spring, as those tones from all other tones of the orchestra."

"I have a tender thought for violets,--a very sad one, Miss Benette;
but still sweet now that what I remember has happened a long while
ago."

"That is the best of sorrow,--all passes off with time but that which
is not bitter, though we can hardly call it sweet. I am grieved I
talked of violets, to touch upon any sorrow you may have had to bear;
still more grieved that you have had a sorrow, for you are very
young."

"I seem to feel, Miss Benette, as if you must know exactly what I have
gone through since I saw you, and I am forced to remember it is not
the case. I am not sorry you spoke about violets, or rather that I
did, because some day I must tell you the whole story of my trouble. I
know not why the violet should remind me more than does the beautiful
white flower upon that rose-bush over there, for I have in my
possession both a white rose that has lived five summers, and an
everlasting violet which will never allow me to forget."

"I know, from your look, that it is about some one dying: but why is
that so sad? We must all die, Mr. Auchester, and cannot stay after we
have been called."

"It may be so, and must indeed; but it was hard to understand, and I
cannot now read why a creature so formed to teach earth all that is
most like heaven, should go before any one had dreamed she could
possibly be taken; for she had so much to do. You would not wonder at
the regret I must ever feel, if you had also known her."

Clara had led me onwards as I spoke, and we stood before that
rose-tree; she broke off a fresh rose quietly, and placed it in my
hand.

"I am more and more unhappy. It was not because I was not sorry that I
said so. Pray tell me about her."

"She was very young, Miss Benette, only sixteen; and more beautiful
than any flower in this garden, or than any star in the sky; for it
was a beauty of spirit, of passion, of awful imagination. She was at
school with me, and I was taught by her how slightly I had learned all
things; she had learned too much, and of what men could not teach her.
I never saw such a face,--but that was nothing. I never heard such a
voice,--but neither had it any power, compared with her heavenly
genius and its sway upon the soul. She had written a symphony,--you
know what it is to do that! She wrote it in three months, and during
the slight leisure of a most laborious student life. I was alarmed at
her progress, yet there was something about it that made it seem
natural. She was ill once, but got over the attack; and the time came
when this strange girl was to stand in the light of an orchestra and
command its interpretation. It was a private performance, but I was
among the players. She did not carry it through. In the very midst she
fell to the ground, overwhelmed by illness. We thought her dead then,
but she lived four days."

"And died, sir? Oh! she did not die?"

"Yes, Miss Benette, she died; but no one then could have wished her to
live."

"She suffered so?"

"No, she was only too happy. I did not know what joy could rise to
until I beheld her face with the pain all passed, and saw her smile in
dying."

"She must have been happy, then. Perhaps she had nothing she loved
except Jehovah, and no home but heaven."

"Indeed, she must have been happy, for she left some one behind her
who had been to her so dear as to make her promise to become his own."

"I am glad she was so wise, then, as to hide from him that she broke
her heart to part with him; for she could not help it: and it was
worthy of a young girl who could write a symphony," said Clara, very
calmly, but with her eyes closed among the flowers she was holding in
her hand. "Sir, what did they do with the symphony? and, if it is not
rude, what did the rose and the violet have to do with this sad tale?"

"Oh! I should have told you first, but I wished to get the worst part
over; I do not generally tell people. It was the day our prizes were
distributed she took her death-blow, and I received from the Chevalier
Seraphael, who superintended all our affairs, and who ordered the
rewards, a breast-pin, with a violet in amethyst, in memory of certain
words he spoke to me in a rather mystical chat we had held one day, in
which he let fall, 'the violin is the violet.' And poor Maria received
a silver rose, in memory of Saint Cecilia, to whom he had once
compared her, and to whom there was a too true resemblance in her
fateful life. The rose was placed in her hair by the person I told you
she loved best, just as she was about to stand forth before the
orchestra; and when she fainted it fell to my feet. I gathered it up,
and have kept it ever since. I do not know whether I had any right to
do so, but the only person to whom I could have committed it, it was
impossible to insult by reminding of her. In fact, he would not permit
it; he left Cecilia after she was buried, and never returned."

Clara here raised her eyes, bright and liquid, and yet all-searching;
I had not seen them so.

"I feel for him all that my heart can feel. Has he never ceased to
suffer? Was she all to him?"

"He will never cease to suffer until he ceases to breathe, and then he
will, perhaps, be fit to bear the bliss that was withdrawn from him as
too great for any mortal heart; that is his feeling, I believe, for he
is still now, and uncomplaining,--ever proud, but only proud about his
sorrow. Some day you will, I trust, hear him play, and you will agree
with me how that grief must have grown into a soul so passionate."

"You mean, when you say he is proud, he will not be comforted, I
suppose? There are persons like that, I know; but I do not understand
it."

"I hope you never will, Miss Benette. You must suffer with your whole
nature to refuse comfort."

"To any one so suffering I should say, the comfort is that all those
who suffer are reserved for joy."

"Not here, though."

"But it will not be less joy because it is saved for by and by. Now
that way of talking makes me angry; I believe there is very little
faith."

"Very little, I grant. But poor Florimond Anastase does not fail
there."

She stopped beside me as we were pacing the lawn.

"Florimond Anastase! you did not say so? Do you mean the great player?
I have heard of that person."

Her face flushed vividly, as rose hues flowing into pearl, her aspect
altered, she seemed convicted of some mistaken conclusion; but,
recovering herself almost instantly, resumed,--

"Thank you for telling me that story,--it will make me better, I hope.
I do not deserve to have grown up so well and strong. May I do my duty
for it, and at least be grateful! You did not say what was done with
the symphony?"

"The person I mentioned would not allow it to be retained. And,
indeed, what else could be done? It was buried in her virgin grave,--a
maiden work. She sleeps with her music, and I know not who could have
divided them."

"You have told me a story that has turned you all over, like the
feeling before a thunder-storm. I will not hear a word more. You
cannot afford to talk of what affects you. Now, let me be very
impertinent and change the key."

"By all means; I have said quite enough, and will thank you."

"There is Laura in the arbor, just across the grass; we will go to
her, if you please, and you shall see her pretty pink frock among the
roses, instead of my black gown. On the way I will tell you that there
is some one, a lady too, so much interested in you that she was going
down to your neighborhood on purpose to find out about you; but I
prevented her from coming, by saying you would be here, and she
answered,--

"'Tell him, then, to come and call upon me.'"

"It can only have been one living lady who would have sent that
message,--Miss Lawrence. Actually I had forgotten all about her, and
she returns upon me with a strong sense of my own ingratitude. I will
certainly call upon her, and I shall be only too glad to identify my
benefactress."

"That you cannot do; she will not allow it,--at least, to this hour
she persists in perfect innocence of the fact."

"That she provided us both with exactly what we wanted at exactly the
right time? She chalked out my career, at least. I'll make her
understand how I feel. Is she not a character?"

"Not more so than yourself, but still one, certainly; and a
peculiarity of hers is, that generous--too generous almost--as she is,
she will not suffer the slightest allusion to her generosities to be
made, nor hint to be circulated that she has a heart at all."

Laura was sitting in the arbor, which was now at hand, but not, as
Clara prophesied, among the roses in any sense, for the green branches
that festooned the lattice were flowerless until the later summer, and
her face appeared fading into a mist of green. The delicate leaves
framed her as a picture of melancholy that has attired itself in
mirth, which mirth but served to fling out the shadow by contrast and
betray the source. Clara sat on one side, I on the other, and
presently we went in to tea. But I did not hear the voice I longed for
that evening, nor was the pianoforte opened that I so well remembered
standing in its "dark corner."




CHAPTER XI.


I determined not to let a day pass without calling on Miss Lawrence,
for I had obtained her address before I left the cottage, and I set
forth the following morning. It was in the midst of a desert of
West-end houses, none of which have any peculiar characteristic, or
suggest any peculiar notion. When I reached the door, I knocked, and
it being opened, gave in my card to the footman, who showed me into a
dining-room void of inhabitants, and there left me.

It seemed strange enough to my perception, after I could sit down to
breathe, that a lady should live all by herself in such an immense
place; but I corrected myself by remembering she might possibly not
live by herself, but have brothers, sisters, nay, any number of
relations or dependants. She certainly did not dine in that great
room, at that long table polished as a looking-glass, where half a
regiment might have messed for change. There were heavy curtains,
striped blue and crimson, and a noble sideboard framed in an arch of
yellow marble.

The walls were decorated with deep-toned pictures on a ground almost
gold color; and I was fastened upon one I could not mistake as a
Murillo, when the footman returned, but only to show me out, for Miss
Lawrence was engaged. I was a little crestfallen, not conceitedly so,
but simply feeling I had better not have taken her at her word, and
retreated in some confusion. Returning very leisurely to my two
apartments near the Strand, and stopping very often on the way at
music or print shops, I did not arrive there for at least an hour, and
was amazed on my entrance to find a note, directed to myself, lying
upon the parlor table-cloth.

I appealed to my landlady from the top of the kitchen stairs, and she
said a man in livery had left it, and was to call for an answer. I
read the same on the spot; it had no seal to break, but was twisted
backwards and forwards, and had this merit, that it was very difficult
to open. It was from Miss Lawrence, without any comment on my call,
but requesting my company that very evening to dinner, at the awful
hour of seven. Never having dined at seven o'clock in my existence,
nor even at six, I was lost in the prospect, and almost desired to
decline, but that I had no excuse of any kind on hand; and therefore
compelled myself to frame a polite assent, which I despatched, and
then sat down to practise.

I made out to myself that she would certainly be alone, as she was the
very person to have fashionable habits on her own account, or at least
that she would be surrounded merely by the people belonging to her in
her home. But I was still unconfessedly nervous when I drew the door
after me and issued into the streets, precisely as the quarter chimes
had struck for seven, and while the streets still streamed with
daylight, and all was defined as at noon.

When I entered the square so large and still, with its broad roads and
tranquil centre-piece of green, I was appalled to observe a carriage
or two, and flattered myself they were at another door; but they had
drawn up at the very front, alas! that I had visited in the morning. I
was compelled to advance, after having stood aside to permit a lady in
purple satin, and two younger ladies in white, to illustrate the
doorway in making their procession first. Then I came on, and was
rather surprised to find myself so well treated; for a gentleman out
of livery, in neater black clothes than a clergyman, deprived me of my
hat and showed me upstairs directly. It struck me very forcibly that
it was a very good thing my hair had the habit of staying upon my
forehead as it should do, and that I was not anxious to tie my
neck-handkerchief over again, as I was to be admitted into the
drawing-room _in statu quo_.

I ascended. It was a well-staircase, whose great height was easy of
attainment from the exceeding lowness of the steps; stone, with a
narrow crimson centre-strip soft as thick-piled velvet. On the
landing-place was a brilliant globe of humming-birds, interspersed
with gem-like spars and many a moss-wreath. The drawing-room door was
opened for me before I had done looking; I walked straight in, and by
instinct straight up to the lady of the house, who as instantly met me
with a frank familiarity that differs from all other, and supersedes
the rarest courtesy.

I had a vague idea that Miss Lawrence must have been married since I
saw her, so completely was she mistress of herself, and so easy was
her deportment,--not to speak of her dress, which was black lace, with
a single feather in her hair of the most vivid green; but unstudied as
very few costumes are, even of married women. She was still Miss
Lawrence, though, for some one addressed her by name,--a
broad-featured man behind her,--and she turned her head alone, and
answered him over her shoulder.

She dismissed him very shortly, or sent him to some one else; for she
led me--as a queen might lead one of her knights, by her finger-tips,
small as a Spaniard's, upon the tips of my gloves, while she held her
own gloves in her other hand--to a gentleman upon the rug, a real
gentleman of the old school, to whom she introduced me simply as to
her father; and then she brought me back again to a low easy-chair,
out of a group of easy-chairs close by the piano, and herself sat down
quite near me, on the extreme corner of an immense embroidered
ottoman.

"You see how it is, my dear Mr. Auchester," she began in her genial
voice,--"a dinner, which I should not have dreamed to annoy you with,
but for one party we expect. You have seen Seraphael, of course, and
the little Burney? Or perhaps not; they have been in town only two
days."

I was about to express something rather beyond surprise, when a fresh
appearance at the door carried her away, and I could only watch the
green plume in despair as it waved away from me. To stifle my
sensations, I just glanced round the room; it was very large, but so
high and so apportioned that one felt no space to spare.

The draperies, withdrawn for the sunset smile to enter, were of palest
sky-color, the walls of the palest blush, the tables in corners, the
chairs in clusters, the cabinets in niches, gilt and carven, were of
the deepest blue and crimson, upon a carpet of all imaginable hues,
like dashed flower-petals. Luxurious as was the furniture, in nothing
it offended even the calmest taste, and the choicest must have
lavished upon it a prodigal leisure.

The pianoforte was a grand one, of dark and lustrous polish; its
stools were velvet; a large lamp, unlighted, with gold tracery over
its moon-like globe, issued from a branch in the wall immediately over
it, and harmonized with a circle of those same lamps above the centre
ottoman, and with the same upon the mantelshelf guarding a beautiful
French clock, and reflected in a sheet of perfect glass sweeping to
the ceiling.

There were about five and twenty persons present, who seemed
multiplied, by their manner and their dresses, into thrice as many,
and who would have presented a formidable aspect but for the hopes
roused within me to a tremendous anticipation. Still I had time,
during the hum and peculiar rustle, to scrutinize the faces present.
There were none worth carrying away, except that shaded by the emerald
plume, and I followed it from chair to chair, fondly hoping it would
return to mine. It did not; and it was evident we were waiting for
some one.

There was a general lull; two minutes by my watch (as I ascertained,
very improperly) it lasted, and two minutes seems very long before a
set dinner. Suddenly, while I was yet gazing after our hostess, the
door flew open, and I heard a voice repeat,--

"The Chevalier Seraphael and Mr. Burney!"

They entered calmly, as I could hear,--not see, for my eyes seemed to
turn in my head, and I involuntarily looked away. The former
approached the hostess, who had advanced almost to the door to meet
him, and apologized, but very slightly, for his late appearance,
adding a few words in a lower tone which I could not catch. He was
still holding his companion by the hand, and, before they had time to
part, the dinner was announced with state.

I lost sight of him long before I obeyed the summons, leading a lady
assigned to me, a head taller than myself, who held a handkerchief in
her hand that looked like a lace veil, and shook it in my face as we
walked down the stairs. I can never sympathize with the abuse heaped
upon these dinner-parties, as I have heard, since I recall that
especial occasion, not only grateful, but with a sense of its Arabian
Night-like charm,--the long table, glistering with damask too white
for the eye to endure, the shining silver, the flashing crystal, the
blaze and mitigated brightness, the pyramid of flowers, the fragrance,
and the picture quiet.

As we passed in noiselessly and sat down one by one, I saw that the
genius, apart from these, was seated by Miss Lawrence at the top of
the table, and I was at the very bottom, though certainly opposite.
Starwood was on my own side, but far above me. I was constrained to
talk with the lady I had seated next me, and as she did not disdain to
respond at length, to listen while she answered; but I was not
constrained to look upon her, nor did I, nor anything but that face so
long removed, so suddenly and inexplicably restored.

It is impossible to describe the nameless change that had crept upon
those faultless features, nor how it touched me, clove to my heart
within. Seraphael had entirely lost the flitting healthful bloom of
his very early youth: a perfect paleness toned his face, as if with
purity out-shadowed,--such pearly clearness flinging into relief the
starry distance of his full, deep-colored eyes; the forehead more
bare, more arched, was distinctly veined, and the temples were of
chiselled keenness; the cheek was thinner, the Hebrew contour more
defined; the countenance had gained in apparent calm, but when meeting
his gaze you could peer into those orbs so evening-blue, their
starlight was passionately restless.

He was talking to Miss Lawrence; he scarcely ceased, but his
conversation was evidently not that which imported anything to
himself,--not the least shade of change thwarted the paleness I have
mentioned, which was that of watchfulness or of intense fatigue. She
to whom he spoke, on the contrary, seemed passed into another form;
she brightened more and more, she flashed, not only from her splendid
eyes, but from her glowing cheek, her brilliant smile: she was on fire
with joy that would not be extinguished; it assuredly was the time of
"all her wealth," and had her mood possessed no other charm, it would
have excited my furious taste by its interesting contrast with his
pale aspect and indrawn expression.

It was during dessert, when the converse had sprung up like a sudden
air in a calm, when politeness quickened and elegance unconsciously
thawed, that--as I watched the little hands I so loved gleaming in the
purple of the grapes which the light fingers separated one by one--I
passed insensibly to the countenance. It was smiling, and for me: a
sudden light broke through the lips, which folded themselves again
instantly, as if never to smile again; but not until I had known the
dawn of the old living expression, that, though it had slept, I felt
now was able to awaken, and with more thankfulness than I can put into
words. He was of those who stood at the door when the ladies withdrew,
and after their retreat he began to speak to me across the table,
serving me, with a skill I could not appreciate too delicately, to the
merest trivialities, and making a sign to Starwood to take the chair
now empty next me.

This was exactly what I wanted, for I had not seen him in the
least,--not that I was afraid he had altered, but that I was anxious
to encounter him the same. Although still a little one, he had grown
more than I expected; his blue eye was the same, the same shrinking
lip,--but a great power seemed called out of both. He was exceedingly
well formed, muscular, though delicate; his voice was that which I
remembered, but he had caught Seraphael's accent, and quite slightly
his style,--only not his manner, which no one could approach or
imitate. I learned from Starwood, as we sipped our single glass of
wine, that the Chevalier had been to Miss Lawrence's that very
morning.

"He told me where he was going, and left me at the hotel; when he came
back he said we were invited for to-night. Miss Lawrence had asked him
to spend one evening, and he was engaged for every one but this. She
was very sorry, she said, that her father had a party to-day. The
Chevalier, however, did not mind, he told her, and should be very
happy to come anyhow."

"But how does it happen that he is so constantly engaged? It cannot be
to concerts every evening?"

"Carl, you have no idea how much he is engaged; the rehearsals are to
be every other day, and the rest of the evenings he has been worried
into accepting invitations. I wish to goodness people would let him
alone; if they knew what I know they would."

"What, my dear boy?"

"That for every evening he spends in company, he sits up half the
night. I know it, for I have watched that light under his door, and
can hear him make the least little stir when all is so quiet,--at
least, I could at Stralenfeld, where he stayed last, for my room was
across the landing-place; and since we came to London, he told me he
has not slept."

"I should think you might entreat him to do otherwise, Starwood, or at
least request his friends to do so."

"He might have no friends, so far as any influence they have goes.
Just try yourself, Carl; and when you see his face, you will not be
inclined to do so any more."

"You spoke of rehearsals, Star,--what may these be? I have not heard
anything."

"I only know that he has brought with him two symphonies, three or
four quartets, and a great roll of organ fugues, besides the score of
his oratorio."

"I had no idea of such a thing. An oratorio?"

"It is what he wrote in Italy some time ago, and only lately went over
and prepared. It is in manuscript."

"Shall we hear it?"

"It is for the third or fourth week in June, but has been kept very
quiet."

"How did Miss Lawrence come to know him? She did not use to know him."

"She seems to know everybody, and to get her own way in everything.
You might ask her; she would tell you, and there would be no fear of
her being angry."

At last we rose. The lamps were lighted when we returned to the
drawing-room; it was nearly ten o'clock, but all was brilliant,
festive. I had scarcely found a seat when Seraphael touched my
shoulder.

"I want very much to go, Charles. Will you come home with me? I have
all sorts of favors to ask you, and that is the first."

"But, sir, Miss Lawrence is going to the piano: will not you play
first?"

"Not at all to-night; we agreed. There are many here who would rather
be excused from music; they can get it at the opera."

He laughed, and so did I. He then placed his other hand on Starwood,
still touching my shoulder, when Miss Lawrence approached,--

"Sir, you know what you said, nor can I ask you to retract it. But may
I say how sorry I am to have been so exacting this morning? It was a
demand upon your time I would not have made had I known what I now
know."

"What is that? Pray have the goodness to tell me, for I cannot
imagine."

"That you have brought with you what calls upon every one to beware
how he or she engages you with trifles, lest they suffer from that
repentance which comes too late. I hear of your great work, and shall
rely upon you to allow me to assist you, if it be at all possible I
can, in the very least and lowest degree."

She spoke earnestly, with an eager trouble in her air. He smiled
serenely.

"Oh! you quite mistake my motive, Miss Lawrence; it had not to do with
music. It was because I have had no sleep that I wished to retire
early; and you must permit me to make amends for my awkwardness. If it
will not exhaust your guests, as I see you were about to play, let me
make the opening, and oblige me by choosing what you like best."

"Sir, I cannot refuse, selfish as I am, to permit myself such
exquisite pleasure. There is another thirsty soul here who will be all
the better for a taste of heavenly things."

She turned to me elated. I looked into his face; he moved to the
piano, made no gesture either of impatience or satisfaction, but drew
the stool to him, and when seated, glanced to Miss Lawrence, who stood
beside him and whispered something. I drew, with Starwood, behind,
where I could watch his hands.

He played for perhaps twenty minutes,--an _andante_ from Beethoven, an
_allegro_ from Mozart, an _aria_ from Weber, cathedral-echoes from
Purcell, fugue-points from Bach; and mixing them like gathered
flowers, bound them together with a wild, delicious _scherzo finale_,
his own. But though that playing was indeed unto me as heaven in
forecast, and though it filled the heart up to the brim, it was
extremely cold, and I do not remember ever feeling that he was
separable from his playing before. When he arose so quietly, lifting
his awful forehead from the curls that had fallen over it as he bent
his face, he was unflushed as calm, and he instantly shook hands with
Miss Lawrence, only leaving her to leave the room. I followed him
naturally, remembering his request; but she detained me a moment to
say,--

"You must come and see me on Thursday, and must also come to
breakfast. I shall be alone, and have something to show you. You are
going along with him, I find,--so much the better; take care of him,
and good night."

Starwood had followed Seraphael implicitly; they were both below. We
got into a carriage at the door, and were driven I knew not whither;
but it was enough to be with him, even in that silent mood.

With the same absent grace he ordered another bed-room when we stayed
at his hotel. I could no more have remonstrated with him than with a
monarch when we found ourselves in the stately sitting-room.

"A pair of candles for the chamber," was his next command; and when
they were brought, he said to us: "The waiter will show you to your
rooms, dear children; you must not wait a moment."

I could not, so I felt, object, nor entreat him himself to sleep.
Starwood and I departed; and whether it was from the novelty of the
circumstances, or my own transcending happiness, or whether it was
because I put myself into one of Starwood's dresses in default of my
own, I do not conjecture, but I certainly could not sleep, and was
forced to leave it alone.

I sat upright for an hour or two, and then rolled amongst the great
hot pillows; I examined the register of the grate; I looked into the
tall glass at my own double: but all would not exhaust me, and towards
the very morning I left my bed and made a sally upon the
landing-place. I knew the number of Seraphael's door, for Starwood had
pointed it out to me as we passed along, and I felt drawn, as by
odyllic force, to that very metal lock.

There was no crack, but a key-hole, and the key-hole was bright as any
star; I peeped in also, and shall never forget my delight, yet dread,
to behold that outline of a figure, which decided me to make an
entrance into untried regions, upon inexperienced moods. Without any
hesitation, I knocked; but recalling to myself his temperament, I
spoke simultaneously,--

"Dear sir, may I come in?"

Though I waited not for his reply, and opened the door quite innocent
of the ghostly apparel I wore--and how very strange must have been my
appearance!--never shall I forget the look that came home to me as I
advanced more near him,--that indrawn, awful aspect, that sweetness
without a smile.

The table was loaded with papers, but there was no strew,--that
"spirit" ever moulded to harmony its slightest "motion;" one delicate
hand was outspread over a sheet, a pen was in the other: he did not
seem surprised, scarcely aroused. I rushed up to him precipitately.

"Dear, dearest sir, I would not have been so rude, but I could not
bear to think you might be sitting up, and I came to see. I pray you,
for God's sake, do go to bed!"

"Carl, very Carl, little Carl, great Carl!" he answered, with the
utmost gentleness, but still unsmiling, "why should I go to bed? and
why shouldest thou come out of thine?"

"Sir, if it is anything, I cannot sleep while you are not sleeping,
and while you ought to be besides."

"Is that it? How very kind, how good! I do not wake wilfully, but if I
am awake I must work,--thou knowest that. In truth, Carl, hadst thou
not been so weary, I should have asked thee this very night what I
must ask thee to-morrow morning."

"Ask me now, sir, for, if you remember, it _is_ to-morrow morning
already."

"Go get into your bed, then."

"No, sir, certainly not while you are sitting there."

A frown, like the shadow of a butterfly, floated over his forehead.

"If thou wilt have it so, I will even go to this naughty bed, but not
to sleep. The fact is, Carl, I cannot sleep in London. I think that
something in the air distresses my brain; it will _not_ shut itself
up. I was about to ask thee whether there is no country, nothing
green, no pure wind, to be had within four miles?"

"Sir, you have hit upon a prodigious providence. There is, as I can
assure you experimentally, fresh green, pure country air of Heaven's
own distilling within that distance; and there is also much
more,--there is something you would like even better."

"What is that, Carlomein?"

"I will not tell you, sir, unless you sleep to-night."

"To be sly becomes thee, precisely because thou art not a fox. I will
lie down; but sleep is God's best gift, next to love, and he has
deprived me of both."

"If I be sly, sir, you are bitter. But there is not too much sleight,
nor bitterness either, where they can be expressed from words. So,
sir, come to bed."

"Well spoken, Carlomein; I am coming,--sleep thou!"

But I would not, and I did not leave him until I had seen his head
laid low in all the bareness of its beauty, had seen his large eyelids
fall, and had drawn his curtains in their softest gloom around the
burdened pillow. Then I, too, went back to bed, and I slept delectably
and dreamless.




CHAPTER XII.


Very late I slept, and before I had finished dressing, Starwood came
for me. Seraphael had been down some time, he told me. I was very
sorry, but relieved to discover how much more of his old bright self
he wore than on the previous evening.

"Now, Carlomein," he began immediately, "we are going on a pilgrimage
directly after breakfast."

I could tell he was excited, for he ate nothing, and was every moment
at the window. To Starwood his abstinence seemed a matter of course; I
was afraid, indeed, that it was no new thing. I could not remonstrate,
however, having done quite enough in that line for the present. It was
not half-past ten when we found ourselves in an open carriage, into
which the Chevalier sprang last, and in springing said to me: "Give
your own orders, Carlomein." I was for an instant lost, but recovered
myself quite in time to direct, before we drove from the hotel, to the
exact locality of Clara's cottage, unknowing whether I did well or
ill, but determined to direct to no other place. As we passed from
London and met the breeze from fields and gardens, miles and miles of
flower-land, I could observe a clearing of Seraphael's countenance:
its wan shadow melted, he seemed actually abandoned to enjoyment;
though he was certainly in his silent mood, and only called out for my
sympathy by his impressive glances as he stood up in the carriage with
his hat off and swaying to and fro. And when we reached, after a
rapid, exhilarating drive, the winding road with its summer trees in
youngest leaf, he only began to speak,--he had not before spoken.

"How refreshing!" he exclaimed, "and what a lovely shade! I will
surely not go on a step farther, but remain here and make my bed. It
will be very unfortunate for me if all those pretty houses that I see
are full, and how can we get at them?"

"I am nearly sure, sir, that you can live here if you like, or close
upon this place; but if you will allow me, I will go on first and
announce your arrival to a friend of mine, who will be rather
surprised at our all coming together, though she would be more happy
than I could express for her to welcome you at her house."

"It is, then, _that_ I was brought to see,--a friend of thine; thou
hast not the assurance to tell me that any friend of thine will be
glad to welcome another! But go, Carlomein,"--and he opened the
carriage-door,--"go and get over thy meeting first; we will give thee
time. Oh, Carlomein! I little thought what a man thou hadst grown when
I saw thee so tall! Get out, and go quickly; I would not keep thee now
for all the cedars of Lebanon!"

I could tell his mood now very accurately, but it made no difference;
I knew what I was about, or I thought I knew, and did not remain to
answer. I ran along the road, I turned the corner; the white gate
shone upon me, and again I stopped to breathe. More roses, more
narcissus lambent as lilies, more sweetness, and still more rest! The
grass had been cut that morning, and lay in its little heaps all over
the sunny lawn. The gravel was warm to my feet as I walked to the
door, and long before the door was opened I heard a voice.

So ardent did my desire expand to identify it with its owner that I
begged the servant not to announce me, nor to disturb Miss Benette if
singing. Thoné took the cue, gave me a kind of smile, and preceded me
with a noiseless march to the very back parlor; I advanced on tiptoe
and crouching forwards. Laura, too, was there, sitting at the table.
She neither read nor worked, nor had anything in her hands; but with
more tact than I should have expected from her, only bowed, and did
not move her lips. In the morning light my angel sat, and her notes,
full orbed and star-like, descended upon my brain. Few notes I
heard,--she was just concluding,--the strain ebbed as the memory of a
kiss itself dissolving; but I heard enough to know that her voice was,
indeed, the realization of all her ideal promise. I addressed her as
she arose, and told her, in very few words, my errand. She was
perturbless as usual, and only looked enchanted, the enchantment
betraying itself in the eye, not in any tremble or the faintest flush.

"Do bring them, sir," she said; "and as you say this gentleman has
eaten nothing, I will try what I can do to make him eat. It is so
important that I wonder you could allow him to come out until he had
breakfasted,"--for I had told her of his impatience; "afterwards, if
he likes, he can go to see the houses. There are several, I do
believe, if they have not been taken since yesterday."

I went back to the carriage, and it was brought on to the gate, I
walking beside it. Thoné was waiting, and held it open,--the sweet hay
scented every breath.

"Oh, how delicious!" said Seraphael, as he alighted, standing still
and looking around.

The meadows, the hedges, the secluded ways first attracted him; and
then the garden, which I thought he would never have overpassed, then
the porch, in which he stood.

"And this is England!" he exclaimed; "it is strange how unlike it is
to that wild dream-country I went to when last I came to London. This
is more like heaven,--quiet and full of life!"

These words recalled me to Clara. He had put his head into the very
midst of those roses that showered over the porch.

"Oh! I must gather one rose of all these,--there are so many; she will
never miss it." And then he laughed. A soft, soft echo of his laugh
was heard,--it startled me by its softness, it was so like an
infant's. I looked over my shoulder, and there, in the shadow of the
hall, I beheld her, her very self. It was she, indeed, who laughed,
and her eye yet smiled. Without waiting for my introduction, she
courtesied with a profound but easy air, and while, to match this
singular greeting, Seraphael made his regal bow, she said, looking at
him,--

"You shall have all the roses, sir, and all my flowers, if you will
let my servant gather them; for I believe you might prick your
fingers, there being also thorns. But while Thoné is at that work,
perhaps you will like to walk in out of the sun, which is too hot for
you, I am sure." She led us to the parlor where she had been singing,
the piano still stood open.

"But," said Seraphael, taking the first chair as if it were his own,
"we disturb you! What were you doing, you and Carl? I ask his
pardon,--Mr. Auchester."

"We two did nothing, sir; I was only singing. But that can very well
be put off till after breakfast, which will be ready in a few
minutes."

"Breakfast?" I thought, but Clara's face told no tales,--her
loveliness was unruffled. The clear blue eye, the divine mouth, were
evidently studies for Seraphael; he sat and watched her eagerly, even
while he answered her.

"You look as if you had had breakfast."

"Indeed, I am very hungry, and so is my friend Mr. Auchester."

"He always looks so, Mademoiselle!" replied the Chevalier, mirthfully,
"but I do really think he might be elegant enough to tell me your
name: he has forgotten to do so in his embarrassment. I cannot guess
whether it be English, French, or German,--Italian, Greek, or Hebrew."

"I am called Clara Benette, sir; that is my name."

"It is not Benette,--La Benetta benedetta! Carlomein, why hast thou so
forgotten? Allow me to congratulate you, Mademoiselle, on possessing
the right to be so named. And for this do I give you joy,--that not
for your gifts it has been bestowed, nor for that genius which is
alone of the possessor, but for that goodness which I now experience,
and feel to have been truly ascribed to you."

He stood to her and held out his hand; calmly she gave hers to it, and
gravely smiled.

"Sir, I thank you the more because I _know_ your name. I hope you will
excuse me for keeping you so long without your breakfast."

He laughed again, and again sat down; but his manner, though of that
playful courtliness, was quite drawn out to her. He scarcely looked at
Laura; I did not even believe that he was aware of her presence, nor
was _I_ aware of the power of his own upon her. After ten minutes
Thoné entered and went up to Clara. She motioned to us all then, and
we arose; but as she looked at Seraphael first, he took her out and
into the dining-room. The table was snowed with damask; flowers were
heaped up in the centre,--a bowl of honeysuckles and heartsease; the
dishes here were white bread, brown bread, golden butter, new-laid
eggs in a nest of moss, the freshest cream, the earliest strawberries;
and before the chair which Clara took, stood a silver chocolate-jug
foaming, and coffee above a day-pale spirit-lamp. On the sideboard
were garnished meat, and poultry already carved, the decanters, and
still more flowers; it was a feast raised as if by magic, and
unutterably tempting at that hour of the day. Clara asked no questions
of her chief guest, but pouring out both chocolate and coffee, offered
them both; he accepted the former, nor refused the wing of a chicken
which Thoné brought, nor the bread which Clara asked me to cut. I was
perfectly astounded; she had helped herself also, and was eating so
quietly, after administering her delicious cups all round, that no one
thought of speaking. At last Starwood, by one of those unfortunate
chances that befall timid people, spoke, and instantly turned scarlet,
dropping his eyes forthwith, though he only said, "I never saw the
Chevalier eat so much." Clara answered, with her fork in her dimpled
hand, "That is because you gentlemen have had a long drive; it always
raises the appetite to come out of London into the country. You cannot
eat too much here."

"Do you think I shall find a house that will hold me and my younger
son," said Seraphael presently, pointing at Starwood his slight
finger, "and a servant or two?"

"If you like to send my servant, sir, she will find out for you."

"No, perhaps you will not dislike to drive a little way with us. I
know Carl will be so glad!"

"We shall be most pleased, sir," she answered, quite quietly, though
there was that in his expression which might easily have fluttered
her. I could not at all account for this eflish mood, though I had
been witness to freaks and fantasies in my boy days. Never had I seen
his presence affect any one so little as Clara. Had she not been of a
loveliness so peculiarly genial, I should have called her cold; as it
was, I felt he had never made himself more at home with any one in my
sight. While, having graciously deferred to her the proposal for an
instant search, he sauntered out into the little front garden, she
went for her bonnet, and came down in it,--a white straw, with a
white-satin ribbon and lining, and a little white veil of her own
work, as I could tell directly I caught her face through its wavering
and web-like tracery. Seraphael placed her in the carriage, and then
looked back.

"Oh, Laura--that is, Miss Lemark--is not coming," observed Miss
Benette; this did not strike me except as a rather agreeable
arrangement, and off we drove. Fritz, Seraphael's own man, was on the
box,--a perfect German, of very reserved deportment, who, however, one
could see, would have allowed Seraphael to walk upon him. His heavy
demonstrations about situations and suitabilities made even Clara
laugh, as they were met by Seraphael's wayward answers and skittish
sallies. We had a very long round, and then went back to dinner with
our lady; but Seraphael, by the time the moon had risen, fell into
May-evening ecstasies with a very old-fashioned tenement built of
black wood and girded by a quickset hedge, because it suddenly, in the
silver shine, reminded him of his own house in Germany, as he said. It
was so near the cottage that two persons might even whisper together
over the low and moss-greened garden-wall.

The invitation of Miss Lawrence I could not forget, even through the
intenser fascination spread about me. I returned with Seraphael to
town again, and again to the country; he having thither removed his
whole effects,--so important, though of so slight bulk, they
consisting almost entirely of scored and other compositions, which
were safely deposited in a little empty room of the rambling house he
had chosen. This room he and Starwood and I soon made fit to be seen
and inhabited, by our distribution of all odd furniture over it, and
all the conveniences of the story. Three large country scented
bed-rooms, with beds big enough for three chevaliers in each, and two
drawing-rooms, were all that we cared for besides. Seraphael was only
like a child that night that is preparing for a whole holiday: he
wandered from room to room; he shut himself into pantry, wine-cellar,
and china-closet; he danced like a day-beam through the low-ceiled
sitting-chambers, and almost threw himself into the garden when he saw
it out of the window. It was the wildest place,--the walks all sown
with grass, an orchard on a bank all moss, forests of fruit-trees and
moss-rose bushes, and the great white lilies in ranks all round the
close-fringed lawn; all old-fashioned flowers in their favorite soils,
a fountain and a grotto, and no end of weeping-ashes, arbors bent from
willows, and arcades of nut and filbert trees. The back of the house
was veiled with a spreading vine--too luxuriant--that shut out all but
fresh green light from the upper bed-rooms; but Seraphael would not
have a spray cut off, nor did he express the slightest dissatisfaction
at being overlooked by the chimneys and roof-hung windows of Clara's
little cottage, which peeped above the hedge. The late inhabitant and
present owner of the house, an eccentric gentlewoman who abjured all
innovation, had desired that no change should pass upon her tenement
during her absence for a sea-side summer; even the enormous mastiff,
chained in the yard to his own house, was to remain barking or baying
as he listed; and we were rather alarmed, Starwood and I, to discover
that Seraphael had let him loose, in spite of the warnings of the
housekeeper, who rustled her scant black-silk skirts against the
doorstep in anger and in dread. I was about to make some slight
movement in deprecation, for the dog was fiercely strong and of a
tremendous expression indeed, but he only lay down before the
Chevalier and licked the leather of his boots, afterwards following
him over the whole place until darkness came, when he howled on being
tied up again until Seraphael carried him a bone from our
supper-table. Our gentle master retired to rest, and his candle-flame
was lost in the moonlight long before I could bring myself to go to
bed. I can never describe the satisfaction, if not the calm, of lying
between two poles of such excitement as the cottage and that haunted
mansion.




CHAPTER XIII.


Seraphael had desired me to stay with him, therefore the next morning
I intended to give up my London lodgings on the road to Miss
Lawrence's square, or rather out of the road. When I came downstairs
into the sun-lit breakfast-room, I found Starwood alone and writing to
his father, but no Chevalier. Nor was he in his own room, for the sun
was streaming through the vine-shade on the tossed bed-clothes, and
the door and window were both open as I descended. Starwood said that
he had gone to walk in the garden, and that we were not to wait for
him. "What! without his breakfast?" said I. But Starwood smiled such a
meaning smile that I was astonished, and could only sit down.

We ate and drank, but neither of us spoke. I was anxious to be off,
and Star to finish his letter; though as we both arose and were still
alone, he yet looked naughty. I would not pretend to understand him,
for if he has a fault, that darling friend of mine, it is that he sees
through people rather too soon, construing their intentions before
they inform experience.

I could not make up my mind to ride, but set off on foot along the
sun-glittering road, through emerald shades, past gold-flecked
meadows, till through the mediant chaos of brick-fields and dust-heaps
I entered the dense halo surrounding London,--"smoke the tiara of
commerce," as a pearl of poets has called it. The square looked
positively lifeless when I came there. I almost shrank from my
expedition, not because of any fear I had on my own account, but
because all the inhabitants might have been asleep behind the glaze of
their many windows.

I was admitted noiselessly and as if expected, shown into the
drawing-room, so large, so light and splendid in the early sun. All
was noiseless, too, within; an air of affluent calm pervaded as an
atmosphere itself the rich-grouped furniture, the piano closed, the
stools withdrawn. I was not kept two minutes; Miss Lawrence entered,
in the act of holding out her hand. I was instantly at home with her,
though she was one of the grandest persons I ever saw. She accepted my
arm, and, not speaking, took me to a landing higher, and to a room
which appeared to form one of a suite; for a curtain extended across
one whole side,--a curtain as before an oratory in a dwelling-house.

Breakfast was outspread here; on the walls, a pale sea-green, shone
delectable pictures in dead-gold frames,--pictures even to an
inexperienced eye pure relics of art. The windows had no curtains,
only a broad gold cornice; the chairs were damask, white and green;
the carpet oak-leaves, on a lighter ground. It was evidently a retreat
of the lesser art,--it could not be called a boudoir; neither ornament
nor mirror, vase nor book-stand, broke the prevalent array. I said I
had breakfasted, but she made me sit by her and told me,--

"I have not, and I am sure you will excuse me. One must eat, and I am
not so capable to exist upon little as you are. Yet you shall not sit,
if you would rather see the pictures, because there are not too many
to tire you in walking round. Too many together is a worse mistake
than too few."

I arose immediately, but I took opportunity to examine my entertainer
in pauses as I moved from picture to picture. She wore black brocaded
silk this morning, with a Venetian chain and her watch, and a collar
all lace; her hair, the blackest I had ever seen except Maria's, was
coiled in snake-like wreaths to her head so small behind while it
arched so broadly and benevolently over her noble eyes. She was older
than I had imagined, and may have been forty at that time; the only
observation one could retain about the fact being that her gathered
years had but served to soften every crudity of an extremely decided
organization, and to crown wisdom with refinement.

She soon pushed back her cup and plate, and came to my side. She
looked suddenly, a little anxiously at me.

"You must be rather curious to know why I asked you to come to me
to-day; and were you not a gentleman, you would have been also
curious, I fancy, to know why I could not see you on Tuesday. I want
you to come this way."

I followed; she slid the curtain along its rings, and we entered the
oratory. I know not that it was so far unlike such precinct, for from
thence art reared her consecrated offerings to the presence of every
beauty. I felt this, and that the artist was pure in heart, even
before her entire character faced my own. The walls here, of the same
soft marine shade, were also lighted by pictures,--the strangest, the
wildest, the least assorted, yet all according.

A peculiar and unique style was theirs; each to each presented the
atmosphere of one imagination. Dark and sombrous woods, moon-pierced,
gleamed duskly from a chair where they were standing frameless;
resting against them, a crowd of baby faces clustered in a giant
flower-chalice; a great lotus was the hieroglyph of a third. On the
walls faces smiled or frowned,--huge profiles; dank pillars mirrored
in rushy pools; fragments of heathen temples; domes of diaphanous
distance in a violet sky; awful palms; dread oceans, with the last
ghost-shadow of a wandering wreck. I stood lost, unaccustomed either
to the freaks or the triumphs of pictorial art; I could only say in my
amaze, "Are these all yours? How wonderful!" She smiled very
carelessly.

"I did not intend you to look at those, except askance, if you were
kind enough. I keep them to advertise my own deficiencies and to
compare the present with the past. The present is very aspiring, and
_for_ the present devours my future. I hope it will dedicate itself
thereunto. I wish you to come here, to this light."

She was placed before an immense easel to the right of a large-paned
window, where the best London day streamed above the lower dimness. An
immense sheet of canvas was turned away from us upon the easel; but in
a moment she had placed it before us, and fell back in the same
moment, a little from me.

Nor shall I ever forget that moment's issue. I forgot it was a
picture, and all I could feel was a trance-like presence brought unto
me in a day-dream of immutable satisfaction. On either side, the
clouds, light golden and lucid crimson, passed into a central sphere
of the perfect blue. And reared into that, as it were the empyrean of
the azure, gleamed in full relief the head, life-sized, of Seraphael.
The bosom white-vested, the regal throat, shone as the transparent
depths of the moon, not moonlight, against the blue unshadowed. The
clouds deeper, heavier, and of a dense violet, were rolled upon the
rest of the form; the bases of those clouds as livid as the storm,
but their edges, where they flowed into the virgin raiment,
sun-fringed, glittering. The visage was raised, the head thrown back
into the ether; but the eyes were drooping, the snow-sealed lips at
rest. The mouth faint crimson, thrilling, spiritual, appalled by its
utter reminiscence; the smile so fiery-soft just touched the lips
unparted. No symbol strewed the cloudy calm below, neither lyre,
laurel-wreathed, nor flowery chaplet; but on either side, where the
clouds disparted in wavering flushes and golden pallors, two hands of
light, long, lambent, life-like, but not earthly, held over the brow a
crown.

Passing my eye among the cloud-lights,--for I cannot call them
shadows,--I could just gather with an eager vision, as one gathers the
thready moon-crescent in a mid-day sky, that on either side a visage
gleamed, veiled and drenched also in the rose-golden mist.

One countenance was dread and glorious, of sharp-toned ecstasy that
cut through the quivering medium,--a self-sheathed seraph; the other
was mild and awful, informed with steadfast beauty, a shining cherub.
They were Beethoven and Bach, as they might be known in heaven; but
who, except the musician, would have known them for themselves on
earth? It was not for me to speak their names,--I could not utter
them; my heart was dry,--I was thirsty for the realization of that
picture promise.

The crown they uplifted in those soft, shining hands was a circle of
stars gathered to each other out of that heavenly silence, and into
the azure vague arose that brow over which the conqueror's sign,
suspended, shook its silver terrors. For such awful fancies shivered
through the brain upon its contemplation that I can but call it
_transcendental_,--beyond expression; the feeling, the fear, the
mystery of starlight pressed upon the spirit and gave new pulses to
the heart. The luminous essence from the large white points seemed
rained upon that forehead and upon the deep tints of the god-like
locks; they turned all clear upon their orbed clusters, they melted
into the radiant halo which flooded, yet as with a glory one could not
penetrate, the impenetrable elevation of the lineaments.

I dared only gaze; had I spoken, I should have wept, and I would not
disturb the image by my tears. I soon perceived how awfully the
paintress had possessed herself of the inspiration, the melancholy,
and the joy. The crown, indeed, was grounded upon rest, and of
unbroken splendor; but it beamed upon the aspect of exhaustion and
longing strife, upon lips yet thirsty, and imploring patience.

I suppose my silence satisfied the artist; for before I had spoken, or
even unriveted my gaze, she said, herself--

"That I have worked upon for a year. I was allowing myself to dream
one day--just such a day as this--last spring; and insensibly my
vision framed itself into form. The faces came before I knew,--at
least those behind the clouds; and having caught them, I conceived the
rest. I could not, however, be certain of my impressions about the
chief countenance, and I waited with it unfinished enough until the
approach of the season, for I knew he was coming now, and before he
arrived I sent him a letter to his house in Germany. I had a pretty
business to find out the address, and wrote to all kinds of persons;
but at last I succeeded, and my suit was also successful. I had asked
him to sit to me."

"Then you had not known him before? You did not know him all those
years?"

"I had seen him often, but never known him. Oh, yes! I had seen his
face. You have a tolerable share of courage: could you have asked him
such a favor?"

"You see, Miss Lawrence, I have received so many favors from him
without asking for them. Had I possessed such genius as yours, I
should not only have done the same, but have felt to do it was my
duty. It is a portrait for all the ages, not only for men, but for
angels."

"Only for angels, if fit at all; for that face is something beyond
man's utmost apprehension of the beautiful. It must ever remain a
solitary idea to any one who has received it. You will be shocked if I
tell you that his beauty prevails more with _me_ than his music."

"But is it not the immediate consequence of such musical investment?"

"I believe, on the contrary, that the musical investment, as you
charmingly express it, is the direct consequence of the lofty
organization."

"That is a new notion for me; I must turn it over before I take it
home. I would rather consider the complement of his gifts to be that
heavenly heart of his which endows them each and all with what must
live forever in unaltered perfection."

"And it pleases me to feel that he is of like passions with us,
protected from the infraction of laws celestial by the image of the
Creator still conserved to his mortal nature, and stamping it with a
character beyond the age. But about his actual advent. He answered my
letter in person. I was certainly appalled to hear of his arrival, and
that he was downstairs. I was up here muddling with my brushes,
without knowing what to be at; up comes my servant--

"'Mr. Seraphael.'

"Imagine such an announcement! I descend, we meet,--for the first time
in private except, indeed, on the occasion when his shadow was
introduced to me, as you may remember. He was in the drawing-room,
pale from travelling, full of languor left by sea-sickness, looking
like a spirit escaped from prison. I was almost ashamed of my daring,
far more so than alarmed. I thought he was about to appoint a day; but
no. He said,--

"'I am at your service this morning, if it suits you; but as you did
not favor me with your address, I could not arrange beforehand. I went
to my music-sellers and asked them about you. I need not tell you that
you were known there, and that I am much obliged to them.'

"Actually it was a fact that I had not furnished him with my address;
but I was perfectly innocent of my folly. What could I do but not lose
a moment? I asked him to take refreshment; no, he had breakfasted, or
dined, or something, and we came up here directly. I never saw such
behavior. He did not even inquire what I was about, but sat, like a
god in marble, just where I had placed him,--out there. You perceive
that I have lost the eyes, or at least have rendered them up to
mystery. Well, when, having caught the outline of the forehead, and
touched the temples, I descended to those eyes, and saw they were full
upon me, I could do nothing with them. I cannot paint light, only its
ghost; nor fire, only its shade. His eyes are at once fire and
light,--I know not of which the most; or, at least, that which is the
light of fire. Even the streaming lashes scarcely tempered the
radiance there. I let them fall, and veiled what one scarcely dares to
meet,--at least I. He sat to me for hours; but though I knew not how
the time went, and may be forgiven for inconsideration, I had no idea
that he was going straight to the committee of the choir-day on the
top of that sitting. I kept him long enough for what I wanted, and as
he did not ask to see the picture, I did not show it him. He shall see
it when it is finished."

"What finish does it require? I see no change that it can need to
carry out the likeness, which is all we want."

"Oh, yes! more depth in the darkness, and more glory in the light;
less electric expression, more ideal serenity,--above all, more pain
above the forehead, more peace about the crown. Moonlight without a
moon, sunshine without the solar rays,--the day of heaven."

"I can only say, Miss Lawrence, that you deserve to be able to do as
you have done, and to feel that no one else could have done it."

"Very exclusive, that feeling, but perhaps necessary. I have it, but
my deserts will only be transcended if Seraphael himself shall
approve. And now for another question,--Will you go with me to this
choir-day?"

"I am trying to imagine what you mean. I have not heard the name until
you spoke it. Is it in the North?"

"Certainly not; though even York Minster would not be a bad
notion--that is to say, it would suit our Beethoven exactly; but this
is another hierarch. What do you think of an oratorio in Westminster
Abbey, the conductor our own, the whole affair of his? No wonder you
have heard nothing; it has been kept very snug, and was only arranged
by the interposition of various individuals whose influence is more of
mammon than of art,--the objection at first being chiefly on the part
of the profession; but that is overruled by their being pretty nearly
every one included in the orchestra. Such a thing is never likely to
occur again. Say that you will go with me. If it be anything to you, I
shall give you one of the best seats, in the very centre, where you
will see and hear better than most people. Imagine the music in that
place of tombs,--it is a melancholy but glorious project; may we
realize it!"

_I_ could not at present,--it was out of the question; nor could I
bear to stay,--there was nothing for it but to make haste out, where
the air made solitude. I bade the paintress good morning, and quitted
her. I believe she understood my frame.




CHAPTER XIV.


I walked home also, and was tolerably tired. Entering the house as one
at home there, I found nobody at home, no Starwood,--no Chevalier. I
lay upon the sofa in a day-dream or two, and when rested, went out
into the garden. I searched every corner, too, in vain; but wandering
past the dividing hedge, a voice floated articulately over the still
afternoon.

All was calm and warm. The slightest sound made way, and I hesitated
not to scale the green barrier, nowhere too high for me to leap it,
and to approach the parlor of the cottage in that unwonted fashion. I
was in for pictures this while, I suppose; for when I reached the
glass doors that swept the lawn wide open, and could peep through them
without disturbing foot on that soft soil, I saw, indeed, another, a
less impressive, not less expressive, view. Clara sat at her piano,
her side-face was in the light. His own, which I was sure to find
there, in profile also, was immediately behind her; but as he stood,
the shade had veiled him, the shade from the trembling leaves without,
through which one sunbeam shot, and upon the carpet kissed his feet.
She was singing, as I could hear, scarcely see, for her lips opened
not more than for a kiss, to sing. The strains moulded themselves
imperceptibly, or as a warble shaken in the throat of a careless
nightingale that knew no listener.

Seraphael, as he stood apart drinking in the notes with such eagerness
that his lips were also parted, had never appeared to me so borne out
of himself, so cradled in a second nature. I could scarcely have
believed that the face I knew so well had yet an expression hidden I
knew not of; but it was so: kindled at another fire than that which
his genius had stolen from above, his eye was charged, his cheek
flushed.

So exquisitely beautiful they looked together,--he in that soft
shadow, she in that tremulous light,--that at first I noticed not a
third figure, now brought before me. Behind them both, but sitting so
that she could see his face, was Laura,--or rather she half lay; some
antique figures carved in statuary have an attitude as listless, that
bend on monuments, or crouch in relievo. She had both her arms
outspread upon the little work-table, hanging over the edge, the hands
just clasped together, as reckless in repose; her face all colorless,
her eyes all clear, but with scarcely more tinting, were fixed, rapt,
upon Seraphael.

I could not tell whether she was feeding upon his eye, his cheek, or
his beauteous hair; all her life came forth from her glance, but it
spent itself without expression. Still, that deep, that feeding gaze
was enough for me; there was in it neither look of hope nor of
despair, as I could have interpreted it. I did not like to advance,
and waited till my feet were stiff; but neither could I retire.

I waited while Clara, without comment on her part or request of his,
glided from song to _scena_, from the romance of a wilderness to the
simplest troll. Her fingers just touched the keys as we touch them for
the violin solo,--supporting, but unnoticeable. At last, when afraid
to be caught,--for the face of the Chevalier in its new expression I
rather dreaded,--I went back, like a thief, the way I came, and still
more like a thief in that I carried away a treasure of remembrance
from those who knew not they had lost it.

I found Starwood yet out, and roved very impatiently all over the
house until, at perhaps five o'clock, Seraphael came in for something.
The dog in the yard barked out; but I was in no humor to let him
loose, and ran straight into the hall.

"Carlomein," said the Chevalier, "I thought you were in London. Is it
possible, my child, that you have not dined?" and he gave orders for
an instant preparation. "I am truly vexed that I did not know it, but
Stern is gone to his father, and will stay till the last coach
to-night. I thought you would be absent also."

"And so, sir, I suppose you had determined to go without your dinner?"

He smiled.

"Not at all, Carlomein. The fact is, I _have_ dined. I could not
resist La Benetta benedetta. I never knew what young potatoes were
until I tasted them over there."

"I daresay not," I thought; but I was wise enough to hold my tongue.

"Then, sir, I shall dine alone; and very much I shall enjoy it. There
is nothing I like so well as dining alone, except to dine alone with
you."

"Carl! Carl! hadst thou been in that devil when he tempted Eve!
Pardon, but I have come home for a few things, and have promised to
return."

"Sir, if you will not think it rude, I must say that for once in your
life you are enjoying what you confer upon others. I am so glad!"

"I thought it says, 'It is better to give than to receive.' I do like
receiving; but perhaps that is because I cannot give this which I now
receive. Carlomein, there is a spell upon thee; there is a charm about
thee, that makes thee lead all thou lovest to all they love! It is a
thing I cannot comprehend, but am too content to feel."

He ran into his study, and returning, just glanced into the room with
an air of _allegresse_ to bid me adieu; but what had he in his arms,
if it were not the score of his oratorio? I knew its name by this
time; I saw it in that nervous writing which I could read at any
earthly distance,--what was to be done with it, and what then? Was he
going to the rehearsal, or a rehearsal of his own?

I had not been half an hour quiet, playing to myself, having unpacked
my fiddle for the first time since I came to London, when the lady of
the scanty silk arrived at my door and aroused me. Some gentlemen had
called to see the Chevalier, and as he was supposed to be absent, must
see me. I went down into a great, dampish dining-room we had not lived
in at all, and found three or four worthies, a deputation from the
band and chorus, who had helplessly assembled two hours ago in London,
and were at present waiting for the conductor.

It was no pleasant task to infringe the fragrant privacy of the
cottage, but I had to do it. I went to the front gate this time, and
sent up a message, that I might not render myself more intrusive than
necessary. He came down as upon the wings of the wind, with his hat
half falling from his curls, and flew to the deputation without a
syllable to me; they carried him off in triumph so immediately that I
could only fancy he looked annoyed, and may have been about that
matter mistaken.

Certainly Clara was not annoyed, whom I went in-doors to see; Laura
had vanished, and she herself was alone in the room, answering my
first notes of admiration merely, "Yes, I have sung to him a good
while." I was, however, so struck with the change, not in manner, but
in her mien, that I would stay on to watch, at the risk of being in
the way more than ever in my days. Since I had entered, she had not
once looked up; but an unusual flush was upon her face, she appeared
serious, but intent,--something seemed to occupy her. At last, after
turning about the music-sheets that strewed the chamber everywhere,
and placing them by in silence,--and a very long time she took,--she
raised her eyes. Their lustre was indeed quickened; never saw I so
much excitement in them; they were still not so grave as
significant,--full of unwonted suggestions. I ventured to say then,--

"And now, Miss Benette, I may ask you what you feel about the
personality of this hero?"

I could not put it better; she replied not directly, but came and sat
beside me on the sofa, by the window. She laid her little hands in her
lap, and her glance followed after them. I could see she was
inexpressibly burdened with some inward revelation. I could not for a
moment believe she trembled, but certainly there was a quiver of her
lips; her silken curls, so calm, did not hide the pulsation,
infantinely rapid, of those temples where the harebell-azure veins
pencilled the rose-flower skin. After a few moments' pause, during
which she evidently collected herself, she addressed me, her own sweet
voice as clear as ever, but the same trouble in it that touched her
gaze.

"Sir, I am going to tell you something, and to ask your advice
besides."

"I am all attention!" indeed, I was in an agony to attend and learn.

"I have had a strange visitor this morning,--very sudden, and I was
not prepared. You will think me very foolish when you hear what is the
matter with me, that I have not written to Mr. Davy; but I prefer to
ask you. You are more enlightened, though you are so young."

"Miss Benette, I know your visitor; for on returning home next door, I
missed my master, and I knew he could be only here. What has he done
that could possibly raise a difficulty, or said that could create a
question? He is my unerring faith, and should be yours."

"I do not wonder; but I have not known him so long, you see, and
contemplate him differently. I had been telling him, as he requested
to know my plans, of the treatment I had received at the opera, and
how I had not quite settled whether to come out now or next year as an
actress. He answered,--

"'Do neither.'

"I inquired why?

"'You must not accept any engagement for the stage in England, and
pray do not hold out to them any idea that you will.'

"Now, what does he mean? Am I to give up my only chance of being able
to live in England? For I wish to live here. And am I to act
unconscientiously? For my conscience tells me that the pure-hearted
should always follow their impulses. Now, I know very few persons; but
I am born to be known of many,--at least I suppose so, or why was I
gifted with this voice, my only gift?"

"Miss Benette, you cannot suppose the Chevalier desires your voice to
be lost. Has he not been informing and interpenetrating himself with
it the whole morning? He has a higher range in view for you, be
assured, or he had not persuaded you, _I_ am certain, to annul your
present privileges. He has the right to will what he pleases."

"And are we all to obey him?"

"Certainly; and only him,--in matters musical. If you knew him as I
do, you would feel this."

"But is it like a musician to draw me away from my duty?"

"Not obviously; but there may be no duty here. You do not know how
completely, in the case of dramatic, and indeed of all other art, the
foundations are out of course."

"You mean they do not fulfil their first intentions. But then nothing
does, except, certainly, as it was first created. We have lost that
long."

"Music, Miss Benette, it appears to me, so long as it preserves its
purity, may consecrate all the forms of art by raising them into its
own atmosphere,--govern them as the soul the body. But where music is
itself degraded, its very type defaced, its worship rendered
ridiculous, its nature mere name, by its own master the rest falls. I
know not much about it, but I know how little the drama depends on
music in this country, and how completely, in the first place, one
must lend one's self to its meanest effect in order to fulfil the
purpose of the writer. All writers for the stage have become profane,
and dramatic writers whom we still confess to, are banished from the
stage in proportion to the elevation of their works. I even go so far
as to think an artist does worse who lends an incomparable organ to
such service than an unheeded player (myself, for example), who
should form one in the ranks of such an orchestra as that of our
opera-houses, where the bare notion or outline of harmony is all that
is provided for us. While the idea of the highest prevails with us,
our artist-life must harmonize, or Art will suffer,--and it suffers
enough now. I have said too long a say, and perhaps I am very
ignorant; but this is what I think."

"You cannot speak too much, sir, and you know a great deal more than I
do. My feeling was that I could perhaps have shown the world that
simplicity of life is not interfered with by a public career, and that
those who love what is beautiful must also love what is good, and
endeavor to live up to it besides. I have spoken to several musicians
abroad, who came to me on purpose; they all extolled my voice, and
entreated me to sing upon the stage. I did so then because I was poor
and had several things I wished to do; but I cannot say I felt at home
with music on the stage in Italy. The gentleman who was here to-day
was the first who disturbed my ideas and dissuaded me. I was
astonished, not because I am piqued,--for you do not know how much I
should prefer to live a quiet life,--but because everybody else had
told me a different story. I do not like to think I shall only be able
to sing in concerts, for there are very few concerts that content me,
and I do so love an orchestra. Am I to give it all up? If this
gentleman had said, 'Only sing in this opera or that,' I could have
made up my mind. But am I never to sing in any? Am I to waste my voice
that God gave me as he gives to others a free hand or a great
imagination? You cannot think so, with all your industry and all your
true enthusiasm."

"Miss Benette, you must not be shocked at what I shall now say,
because I mean it with all reverence. I could no more call in
question the decision of such genius than I could that of Providence
if it sent me death-sickness or took away my friends. I am certain
that the motive, which you cannot make clear just yet, is that you
would approve of."

"And you also, sir?"

"And I also, though it is as dark to me as to you. Let it stand over,
then; but for all our sakes do not thwart him,--he has suffered too
much to be thwarted."

"Has he suffered? I did not know that."

"Can such a one live and not suffer? A nature which is all love,--an
imagination all music?"

"I thought that he looked delicate, but very happy,--happy as a child
or an angel. I have seen your smile turn bitter, sir,--pardon,--but
never his. I am sure, if it matters to him that I should accede, I
will do so, and I cannot thank you enough for telling me."

"Miss Benette, if you are destined to do anything great for music, it
may be in one way as well as in another; that is, if you befriend the
greatest musician, it is as much as if you befriended music. Now you
cannot but befriend him if you do exactly as he requests you."

"In all instances, you recommend?"

"_I_, at least, could refuse him nothing. The nourishment such a
spirit requires is not just the same as our own, perhaps, but it must
not the less be supplied. If I could, now, clean his boots better than
any one else, or if he liked my cookery, I would give up what I am
about and take a place in his service."

"What! you would give up your violin, your career, your place among
the choir of ages?"

"I would; for in rendering a single hour of his existence on earth
unfretted,--in preserving to him one day of ease and comfort,--I
should be doing more for all people, all time, at least for the ideal,
who will be few in every age, but many in all the ages, and who I
believe leaven society better than a priesthood. I would not say so
except to a person who perfectly understands me; for as I hold laws to
be necessary, I would infringe no social or religious _régime_ by one
heterodox utterance to the ear of the uninitiated: still, having said
it, I keep to my text, that you must do exactly as he pleases. He has
not set a seal upon your throat at present, if you have been singing
all the morning."

"I have been singing from his new great work. There is a contralto
solo, 'Art Thou not from Everlasting?' which spoiled my voice; I could
not keep the tears down, it was so beautiful and entreating. He was a
little angry at me; at least he said, 'You must not do that.' There is
also a very long piece which I scarcely tried, we had been so long
over the other, which he made me sing again and again until I composed
myself. What a mercy Mr. Davy taught us to read so fast! I have found
it help me ever since. Do you mean to go to this oratorio?"

"I am to go with Miss Lawrence. How noble, how glorious she is!"

"Your eyes sparkle when you speak of her. I knew you would there find
a friend."

"I hope you, too, will hear it, Miss Benette. I shall speak to the
Chevalier about it."

"I pray you not to do so; there will not be any reason, for I find out
all about those affairs. Take care of yourself, Mr. Auchester, or
rather make Miss Lawrence take care of you; she will like to have to
do so."

"I must go home, if it is not to be just yet, and return on purpose
for the day."

"But that will fatigue you very much,--cannot you prevent it? One
ought to be quiet before a great excitement."

"Oh! you have found that. I cannot be quiet until afterwards."

"I have never had a great excitement," said Clara, innocently; "and I
hope I never may. It suits me to be still."

"May that calm remain in you and for you with which you never fail to
heal the soul within your power, Miss Benette!"

"I should indeed be proud, Mr. Auchester, to keep you quiet; but that
you will never be until it is forever."

"In that sense no one could, for who could ever desire to awaken from
that rest? And from all rest here it is but to awaken."

I felt I ought to go, or that I might even remain too long. It was
harder at that moment to leave her than it had ever been before; but I
had a prescience that for that very reason it was better to depart.
Starwood had returned, I found, and was waiting about in the evening,
before the candles came.

We both watched the golden shade that bound the sunset to its crimson
glow, and then the violet dark, as it melted downwards to embrace the
earth. We were both silent, Starwood from habit (I have never seen
such power of abstraction), I by choice. An agitated knock came
suddenly, about nine, and into the room bounced the big dog, tearing
the carpet up with his capers. Seraphael followed, silent at first as
we; he stole after us to the window, and looked softly forth. I could
tell even in the uncertain silver darkness of that thinnest shell of
a moon that his face was alight with happiness, an ineffable
gentleness,--not the dread alien air of heaven, soothing the passion
of his countenance. He laid for long his tiny hand upon my shoulder,
his arm crept round my neck, and drawing closer still, he sighed
rather than said, after a thrilling pause,--

"Carlomein, wilt thou come into my room? I have a secret for thee; it
will not take long to tell."

"The longer the better, sir."

We went out through the dark drawing-room, we came to his
writing-chamber; here the white sheets shone like ghosts in the bluish
blackness, for we were behind the sunset.

"We will have no candles, because we shall return so soon. And I love
secrets told in the dark, or between the dark and light. I have
prevented that child from taking her own way. It was very naughty, and
I want to be shriven. Shrive me, Charles."

"In all good part, sir, instantly."

"I have been quarrelling with the manager. He was very angry, and his
whiskers stood out like the bristles of a cat; for I had snatched the
mouse from under his paw, you see."

"The mouse must have been glad enough to get away, sir. And you have
drawn a line through her engagement? She has told me something of it,
and we are grateful."

"I have cancelled her engagement! Well, this one,--but I am going to
give her another. She does not know it, but she will sing for me at
another time. Art thou angry, Carl? Thou art rather a dread
confessor."

"I could not do anything but rejoice, sir. How little she expects to
bear such a part! She is alone fitted for it; an angel, if he came
into her heart, could not find one stain upon his habitation."

"The reason you take home to you, then, Carlomein?"

"Sir, I imagine that you consider her wanting in dramatic power; or
that as a dramatic songstress under the present dispensation she would
but disappoint herself, and perhaps ourselves; or that she is too
delicately organized,--which is no new notion to me."

"All of these reasons, and yet not one,--not even because, Carlomein,
in all my efforts I have not written directly for the stage, nor
because a lingering recollection ever forbids profane endeavor. There
is yet a reason, obvious to myself, but which I can scarcely make
clear to you. Though I would have you know, and learn as truth, that
there is nothing I take from this child I will not restore to her
again, nor shall she have the lesson to be taught to feel that in
heaven alone is happiness."

He made a long, long pause. I was in no mood to reply, and it was not
until I was ashamed of my own silence that I spoke; then my own
accents startled me. I told Seraphael I must return on the morrow to
my own place if I were to enjoy at length what Miss Lawrence had set
before me. He replied that I must come back to him when I came, and
that he would write to me meantime.

"If I can, Carlomein; but I cannot always write even, my child, to
thee. There is one thing more between us,--a little end of business."

He lit with a waxen match a waxen taper, which was coiled into a
brazen cup; he brought it from the mantelshelf to the table; he took a
slip of paper and a pen. The tiny flame threw out his hand, of a
brilliant ivory, while his head remained in flickering shadow,--I
could trace a shadow smile.

"Now, Carlomein, this brother of yours. His name is David, I think?"

"Lenhart Davy, sir."

"Has he many musical friends?"

"Only his wife particularly so,--the class are all neophytes."

"Well, he can do as he pleases. Here is an order."

He held out the paper in a regal attitude, and in the other hand
brought near the tremulous taper, that I so might read. It was,--

      ABBEY CHOIR, WESTMINSTER.

      Admit Mr. Lenhart Davy and party 21st June.

      SERAPHAEL.

I could say nothing, nor even essay to thank him,--indeed he would not
permit it, as I could perceive. We returned directly to the
drawing-room, and roused Starwood from a blue study, as the Chevalier
expressed it.

"I am ready, and Miss Lemark is tired of waiting for both of us," said
Miss Lawrence, as she entered that crown of days, the studio; "I have
left her in the drawing-room. And, by the way, though it is nothing to
the purpose, she has dressed herself very prettily."

"I do not think it is nothing to the purpose,--people dress to go to
church, and why not, then, to honor music? You have certainly
succeeded also, Miss Lawrence, if it is not impertinent that I say
so."

"It is not impertinent. You will draw out the colors of that bit of
canvas, if you gaze so ardently."

It was not so easy to refrain. That morning the pictured presence had
been restored to its easel, framed and ready for inspection. I had
indeed lost myself in that contemplation; it was hard to tear myself
from it even for the embrace of the reality. The border, dead gold,
of great breadth and thickness, was studded thickly with raised bright
stars, polished and glittering as points of steel. The effect thus
seemed conserved and carried out where in general it abates. I cannot
express the picture; it was finished to that high degree which
conceals its own design, and mantles mechanism with pure suggestion. I
turned at length and followed the paintress; my prospects more
immediate rushed upon me.

Our party, small and select as the most seclusive spirit could ask
for, consisted of Miss Lawrence and her father,--a quiet but genuine
amateur he,--of Miss Lemark, whom my friend had included without a
question, with Starwood and myself. We had met at Miss Lawrence's, and
went together in her carriage. She wore a deep blue muslin
dress,--blue as that summer heaven; her scarf was gossamer, the hue of
the yellow butterfly, and her bonnet was crested with feathers
drooping like golden hair. Laura was just in white; her Leghorn hat
lined with grass-green gauze; a green silk scarf waved around her.
Both ladies carried flowers. Geraniums and July's proud roses were in
Miss Lawrence's careless hand, and Laura's bouquet was of myrtle and
yellow jasmine.

We drove in that quiet mood which best prepares the heart. We passed
so street by street, until at length, and long before we reached it,
the gray Abbey towers beckoned us from beyond the houses, seeming to
grow distant as we approached, as shapes of unstable shadow, rather
than time-fast masonry.

Into the precinct we passed, we stayed at the mist-hung door. It was
the strangest feeling--mere physical sensation--to enter from that
searching heat, those hot blue heavens, into the cool, the dream of
dimness, where the shady marbles clustered, and the foot fell dead and
awfully, where hints more awful pondered, and for our coming waited.
Yea, as if from far and very far, as if beyond the grave descending,
fell wondrous unwonted echoes from the tuning choir unseen.
Involuntarily we paused to listen, and many others paused,--those of
the quick hand or melodious forehead, those of the alien aspect who
ever draw after music. Now the strings yearned fitfully,--a sea of
softest dissonances; the wind awoke and moaned; the drum detonated and
was still; past all the organ swept, a thundering calm.

Entering, still hushed and awful, the centre of the nave, we caught
sight of the transept already crowded with hungering, thirsting faces;
still they too, and all there hushed and awful. The vision of the
choir itself, as it is still preserved to me, is as a picture of
heaven to infancy. What more like one's idea of heaven than that
height, that aspiring form,--the arches whose sun-kissed summits
glowed in distance, whose vista stretched its boundaries from the
light of rainbows at one end, on the other to the organ, music's
archetype? Not less powerful, predominating, this idea of our other
home, because no earthly flowers nor withering garlands made the
thoughts recoil on death and destiny,--the only flowers there, the
rays transfused through sun-pierced windows; the blue mist strewing
aisle and wreathing arch, the only garlands. Nor less because for once
an assembly gathered of all the fraternities of music, had the unmixed
element of pure enthusiasm thrilled through the "electric chain" from
heart to heart. Below the organ stood Seraphael's desk, as yet
unhaunted; the orchestra; the chorus, as a cloud-hung company, with
starlike faces in the lofty front.

I knew not much about London orchestras, and was taking a particular
stare, when Miss Lawrence whispered in a manner that only aroused, not
disturbed me: "There is our old friend Santonio. Do look and see how
little he is altered!"

I caught his countenance instantly,--as fine, as handsome, a little
worn at its edges, but rather refined by that process than otherwise.
"I did not ask about him, because I did not know he was in London. He
is, then, settled here; and is he very popular?"

"You need not ask the question; he is too true to himself. No,
Santonio will never be rich, though he is certainly not poor."

Then she pointed to me one head and another crowned with fame; but I
could only spare for them a glance,--Santonio interested me still. He
was reminding me especially of himself as I remembered him, by laying
his head, as he had used to do, upon the only thing he ever really
loved,--his violin,--when, so quietly as to take us by surprise,
Seraphael entered, I may almost say rose upon us, as some new-sprung
star or sun.

Down the nave the welcome rolled, across the transept it overflowed
the echoes; for a few moments nothing else could be felt, but there
was, as it were, a tender shadow upon the very reverberating
jubilance,--it was subdued as only the musical subdue their proud
emotions; it was subdued for the sake of one whose beauty, lifted over
us, appeared descending, hovering from some late-left heaven, ready to
depart again, but not without a sign, for which we waited.
Immediately, and while he yet stood with his eyes of power upon the
whole front of faces, the solo-singers entered also and took their
seats all calmly.

There were others besides Clara, but besides her I saw nothing, except
that they were in colors, while she wore black, as ever; but never had
I really known her loveliness until it shone in contrast with that
which was not so lovely. More I could not perceive, for now the
entering bar of silence riveted; we held our breath for the coming of
the overture.[8]

It opened like the first dawn of lightening, yet scarce yet lightened
morning, its vast subject introduced with strings alone in that joyous
key which so often served him, yet as in the extreme of vaulting
distance; but soon the first trombone blazed out, the second and third
responding with their stupendous tones, as the amplifications of fugue
involved and spread themselves more and more, until, like glory
filling up and flooding the height of heaven from the heaven of
heavens itself, broke in the organ, and brimmed the brain with the
calm of an utter and forceful expression, realized by tone. In
sympathy with each instrument, it was alike with none, even as the
white and boundless ray of which all beams, all color-tones are born.
The perfect form, the distinct conception of this unbrothered work,
left our spirits as the sublime fulfilment confronted them. For once
had genius, upon the wings of aspiration, that alone are pure, found
all it rose to seek, and mastered without a struggle all that it
desired to embrace; for the pervading purpose of that creation was the
passioned quietude with which it wrought its way. The vibrating
harmonies, pulse-like, clung to our pulses, then drew up, drew out
each heart, deep-beating and undistracted, to adore at the throne
above from whence all beauty springs. And opening and spreading thus,
too intricately, too transcendentally for criticism, we do not essay,
even feebly, to portray that immortal work of a music-veiled immortal.

Inextricable holiness, precious as the old Hebrew psalm of all that
hath life and breath,[9] exhaled from every modulation, each dropped
celestial fragrances, the freshness of everlasting spring.
Suggestive,--our oratorio suggested nothing here, nothing that we find
or feel; all that we seek and yearn to clasp, but rest in our
restlessness to discover is beyond us! In nothing that form of music
reminded of our forms of worship,--in the day of Paradise it might
have been dreamed of, an antepast of earth's last night, and of
eternity at hand,--or it might be the dream of heaven that haunts the
loving one's last slumber.

I can no more describe the hush that hung above and seemed to
spiritualize the listeners until, like a very cloud of mingling souls,
they seemed congregated to wait for the coming of a Messiah who had
left them long, promising to return; nor how, as chorus after chorus,
built up, sustained, and self-supported, gathered to the stricken
brain, the cloud of spirits sank, as in slumber sweeter than any
dreamful stir, upon the alternating strains and songs, all
softness,--all dread soothing, as the fire that burned upon the
strings seemed suddenly quenched in tears. Faint supplications wafted
now, now deep acclaims of joy; but all, all surcharged the spirit
alike with the mysterious thrall and tenderness of that uncreate and
unpronounceable Name, whose eternal love is all we need to assure us
of eternal life.

It was with one of those alternate strains that Clara rose to sing,
amidst silence yet unbroken, and the more impressive because of the
milder symphony that stole from the violoncello, its meandering pathos
asking to support and serve her voice. Herself penetrated so deeply
with the wisdom of genius, she failed to remind us of herself; even
her soft brow and violet eyes--violet in the dense glory of the Abbey
afternoon light--were but as outward signs and vivid shadows of the
spirit that touched her voice. Deeper, stiller than the violoncello
notes, hers seemed as those articulated, surcharged with a revelation
beyond all sound.

Calm as deep, clear as still, they were yet not passionless; though
they clung and moulded themselves strictly to the passion of the
music, lent not a pulse of their own; nor disturbed it the rapt
serenity of her singing to gaze upon her angel-face. No child could
have seemed less sensitive to the surrounding throng, nor have
confided more implicitly in the father of its heart, than she leaned
upon Seraphael's power.

I made this observation afterwards, when I had time to think; at
present I could only feel, and feeling know, that the intellect is but
the servant of the soul. When at length those two hours, concentrating
such an eternity in their perfection of all sensation, had reached
their climax, or rather when, brightening into the final chorus,
unimprisoned harmonies burst down from stormy-hearted organ, from
strings all shivering alike, from blasting, rending tubes, and thus
bound fast the Alleluia,--it was as if the multitude had sunk upon
their knees, so profound was the passion-cradling calm. The
blue-golden lustre, dim and tremulous, still crowned the unwavering
arches,--tender and overwrought was laid that vast and fluctuating
mind. So many tears are not often shed as fell in that silent
while,--dew-stilly they dropped and quickened; but still not all had
wept.

Many wept then who had never wept before; many who had wept before
could not weep now,--among them I. Our party were as if lost to me; as
I hid my face my companion did not disturb me,--she was too far
herself in my own case. I do not know whether I heard, but I was aware
of a stretching and breathing; the old bones stirring underneath the
pavement would have shaken me less, but could not have been less to my
liking; the rush, however soft, the rustle, however subdued, were
agony, were torment: I could only feel, "Oh that I were in heaven!
that I might never return to earth!" But then it came upon me, to that
end we must all be changed. This was sad, but of a sadness peculiarly
soothing; for could we be content to remain forever as we are here,
even in our holiest, our strongest moments?

During the last reverberations of that unimaginable Alleluia I had not
looked up at all; now I forced myself to do so, lest I should lose my
sight of _him_,--his seal upon all that glory. As Seraphael had risen
to depart, the applause, stifled and trembling, but not the less by
heartfuls, rose for him.

He turned his face a moment,--the heavenly half-smile was there; then
at that very moment the summer sun, that, falling downwards in its
piercing glare, glowed gorgeous against the flower-leaf windows, flung
its burning bloom, its flushing gold upon that countenance. We all saw
it, we all felt it,--the seraph-strength, the mortal beauty,--and that
it was pale as the cheek of the quick and living changed in
death,--that his mien was of no earthly triumph!

FOOTNOTES:

[8] The Lobgesang, or Hymn of Praise.

[9] The majestic phrase with which the symphony opens, and which also
appears in the vocal parts ("All that has life and breath"), is the
Intonation to the second tone of the Magnificat.




CHAPTER XV.


To that last phase of an unworldly morning succeeded the usual
contrasts both of state and mood. Pushing out all among the marbles in
a graceless disorder, finding in the sacred gloom of the precinct the
flashing carriages, the crested panels; a rattle, a real noise, real
things, real people,--these were as one might expect; and yet I was
very ungrateful, for I desired especially to avoid my dear brother and
dearest sister, who had come from the country that very day, though I
yet had failed to recognize or seek for them. Davy could generally
express what he _felt_ about music, and I did not know how it might
be.

I was thankful to be with Miss Lawrence, who behaved exactly as I
wished; that is to say, when we were fairly seated she began to talk
to her father, not to me, and upon indifferent or adverse matters. Of
Laura I had not even thought until now. She was upon my side, though
not just next me; she leaned back, and was so slight that nothing
could be seen of her, except her crushed-up dress. While, as an
amusing point of idiosyncrasy, I may remark that Miss Lawrence's dress
was as superb as ever; she also carried her flowers, not one decayed.
Laura has lost hers altogether.

Poor Starwood had closed his eyes, and was pretending to be asleep; he
had one of those headaches of his that rendered silence a necessity,
although they are "only nervous," and do not signify in the least. I
had no headache; I never was better in my life, and I never felt so
forcibly how much life is beyond _living_.

We drove home soon enough; I was Miss Lawrence's guest, and I knew
that with her generous goodness she had invited Millicent and Davy. We
had scarcely entered the drawing-room, where everything was utterly
unreal to me, before Davy's little quick knock came.

Miss Lawrence then approached me, and putting her bonnet quite over my
face, said, in a knowing whisper:

"You just go along upstairs; I know you cannot bear it. I am not made
quite of your stuff, and shall be happy to entertain your people. Your
brother and sister are no such awful persons to me, I assure you."

I obeyed,--perhaps selfishly; but I should have been poor company
indeed,--and went to my large bed-room. Large and luxuriously
furnished, it even looked romantic. I liked it; I passed to the
window, and was disturbed a moment afterwards by a servant who bore a
tray of eatables, with wine, sent by Miss Lawrence, of course, whose
moments counted themselves out in deeds of kindness. I took the tray,
delivered it to the charge of the first chair next the door, and
returned to my own at the window-seat.

The blue sky, so intense and clear, so deep piercing, was all I needed
to gaze on; and I was far gone in revery when I heard a knock at the
door of my room. It was a strange, short beat, almost as weird as
"Jeffrey," but at least it startled me to rise. I arose, and opened
it. I beheld Laura. I was scarcely surprised; yet I should indeed have
been surprised but for my immediate terror, almost awe, at her
unformal aspect.

I never saw a living creature look so far like death. There was no
gleam of life in her wan face, so fallen, agonized; no mortal,
spending sickness could have so reduced her! She fixed upon me her
wild eyes, clear as tearless; but at first she could not speak. She
tried again and again, but at last she staggered, and I put her, I
know not how, exactly, into a chair at hand. She was light almost as a
child of five years old, but so listless that I was afraid of hurting
her; and immediately she sat down she fainted. It was a real,
unmitigated faint, and no mistake; I could see she had not herself
expected it. I was accustomed to this kind of thing, however, for
Lydia at home was fond of fainting away in church, or on the threshold
of the door; also Fred's wife made a point of fainting at regular
intervals. But I never saw any one faint as Laura: she turned to
marble in a moment; there was a rigid fixing of her features that
would have alarmed me had I loved her, and that rendered my very
anxiety for her a grief. I could not lift her then, for light as she
was, she leaned upon me, and I could only stretch my arm to reach the
decanter from its stand. The wine was, however, of no use at present;
I had to put the glass upon the floor after filling it with
unmentionable exertion. But after ten minutes or so, as I expected
from a relaxation of her countenance, she awoke as out of a breathless
sleep. She looked at me, up into my face; she was again the little
Laura whom I had known at Davy's class.

"I only wanted to ask you to let me lie upon your bed, for I am going
back to-night, and have not a room here; and I did not like to ask
Miss Lawrence. I hope you do not mind it. I should not have done so,
if I had not felt so very ill."

The humility of her manner here, so unlike what I had seen in the
little I had seen of her, made me ashamed, and it also touched me
seriously. I said I was sorry, very sorry, that she should be ill, but
that it was what any very delicate or feeling person might expect
after so much excitement; and as I spoke, I would have assisted her,
but she assisted herself, and lay down upon the bed directly.

"If you please, sit in the window away from me, and go on with your
thoughts. Do not trouble yourself about me, or I shall go away again."

"I will keep quiet, certainly, because you yourself should keep so."

And then I gave her the wine, and covered her with the quilt to the
throat; for although it was so warm, she had begun to shake and
tremble as she lay. I held the wine to her lips, for she could not
hold the glass; and while I did so, before she tasted, she said, with
an emphasis I am very unlikely ever to forget,--

"I wish it could be poison."

I saw there was something the matter then, and as being responsible at
that instant, I mechanically uttered the reply,--

"Will you not tell me why you wish it? I _can_ mix poison; but I
should be very sorry to give it to any one, and above all to you."

"Why to _me_? You would be doing more good than by going to hear all
that music."

I gazed at her for one moment; a suspicion (which, had it been a
certainty, would have failed to turn me from her) thwarted my simple
pity. I gazed, and it was enough; I felt there was nothing I needed
fear to know,--that child had never sinned against her soul. I
therefore said, more carelessly than just then I felt:

"Miss Lemark, because you are gifted, because you are good, because
you are innocent. It is not everybody who is either of these, and very
few indeed are all the three. I will not have you talk just now,
unless, indeed, you can tell me that I can do nothing for you. You
know how slight my resources are, but you need not fear to trust me."

"If you did let me talk, what should I say? But you have told a
lie,--or rather, I made you tell it. I am _not_ gifted,--at least, my
gifts are such as nobody really cares for. I am innocent? I am _not_
innocent; and for the other word you used, I do not think I ought to
speak it,--it no more belongs to me than beauty or than happiness."

"All that is beautiful belongs to all who love it, thank God, Miss
Lemark, or I should be very poor indeed in that respect. But why are
you so angry with yourself because, having gone through too much
happiness, you are no longer happy? It must be so for all of us, and I
do not regret, though I have felt it."

"_You_ regret it,--you to regret anything!" said Laura, haughtily, her
hauteur striking through her paleness reproachfully. "You--a man! I
would sell my soul, if I have a soul, to be a man, to be able to live
to myself, to be delivered from the torment of being and feeling what
nobody cares for."

"If we live to ourselves, we men,--if I may call myself a man,--we are
not less tormented, and not less because men are expected to bear up,
and may not give themselves relief in softer sorrow. My dear Miss
Lemark, it appears to me that if we allow ourselves to sink, either
for grief or joy, it matters not which, we are very much to blame, and
more to be pitied. There is ever a hope, even for the hopeless, as
they think themselves; how much more for those who need not and must
not despair! And those who are born with the most hopeful temper find
that they cannot exist without faith."

"That is the way the people always talk who have everything the world
can give them,--who have more than everything they wish for; who have
all their love cared for; who may express it without being mocked, and
worship without being trampled on. You are the most enviable person in
the whole world except one, and I do not envy her, but I do envy you."

"Very amiable, Miss Lemark!" and I felt my old wrath rising, yet
smiled it down. "You see all this is a conjecture on your part; you
cannot know what I feel, nor is it for you to say that because I am a
man I can have exactly what I please. Very possibly, precisely because
I am a man, I cannot. But anyhow, I shall not betray myself, nor is it
ever safe to betray ourselves, unless we cannot help it."

"I do not care about betraying myself; I am miserable, and I _will_
have comfort,--comfort is for the miserable!"

"Not the comfort a human heart can bring you, however soft it may
chance to be."

"I should hate a soft heart's comfort; I would not take it. It is
because you are not soft-hearted I want yours."

"I would willingly bestow it upon you if I knew how; but you know that
Keble says: "Whom oil and balsams kill, what salve can cure?'"

"I do not know Keble."

"Then you ought to cultivate his acquaintance, Miss Lemark, as a poet,
at least, if not as a gentleman."

I wished at once to twist the subject aside and to make her laugh; a
laugh dispels more mental trouble than any tears at times. But,
contrary to expectation on my part, my recipe failed here; she broke
into a tremendous weeping, without warning, nor did she hide her
face, as those for the most part do who must shed their tears. She
sobbed openly, aloud; and yet her sorrow did not inspire me with
contempt, for it was as unsophisticated as any child's. It was evident
she had not been accustomed to suffering, and knew not how to restrain
its expression, neither that it ought to be restrained. I moved a few
feet from her, and waited; I did right,--in the rain the storm
exhaled. She wiped away her tears, but they yet pearled the long, pale
lashes as she resumed,--

"I am much obliged to you for telling me I ought not to say these
things; but it would be better if you could prevent my feeling them."

"No one can prevent that, Miss Lemark; and perhaps it does not signify
what you feel, if you can prevent its interfering with your duty to
others and to yourself."

"You to talk of duty,--you, who possess every delight that the earth
contains, and with whom I would rather change places than with the
angels!"

"I have many delights; but if I had no duties to myself, the delights
would fail. An artist, I consider, Miss Lemark, has the especial duty
imposed upon him or her to let it be seen that art is the nearest
thing in the universe to God, after nature; and his life must be
tolerably pure for that."

"That is just it. But it is easy enough to do right when you have all
that your heart wants and your mind asks for. I have nothing."

"Miss Lemark, you are an artist."

"You know very well how you despise such art as mine, even if I did my
duty by that; but I do not, and that is what I want comfort for. You
did not think I should tell you anything else!"

"I would have you tell me nothing that you are not obliged to say; it
is dangerous,--at least, I should find it so."

"You have not suffered; or if you have, you have never offended. I
have done what would make you spurn me. But that would not matter to
me; anything is better than to seem what I am not."

"What is the matter, then? I never spurned a living creature, God
knows; and for every feeling of antipathy to some persons, I have felt
a proportionate wish for their good. There are different ranks of
spirits, Miss Lemark, and it is not because we are in one that we do
not sympathize quite as much as is necessary with the rest. Albeit,
you and I are of one creed, you know,--both artists, and both, I
believe, desirous to serve art as we best may; thus we meet on equal
grounds, and whatever you say I shall hear as if it were my sister who
spoke to me."

"If you meant that, it would be very kind, for I have no brother; I
have none of my blood, and I can expect no one else to love me. I do
not care to be loved, even; but every one must grow to something. You
know Clara? I see you do; you always felt for her as you could not
help. No one could feel for her as she deserves. I wish I could die
for Clara, and now I cannot die even for myself, for I feel, oh! I
feel that to die is not to die,--that music made me feel it; but I
have never felt it before,--I have been a heathen. I cannot say I wish
I had not heard it, for anything is better than to be so shut out as I
was. You remember how, when I was a little girl, I loved to dance. I
always liked it until I grew up; but I cannot tell you how at last,
when I came out in Paris, and after the first few nights,--which were
most beautiful to me,--I wearied. Night after night, in the same
steps, to the same music--music--Is it music? You do not look as if
you called it so. I did not know I danced,--I dreamed; I am not sure
now, sometimes, that I was ever awake those nights. I was lazy, and
grew indolent; and when Clara came to Paris, I went along with her.
Would you believe it? I have done nothing ever since." She paused a
long minute; I did not reply. "You are not shocked?"

"No. I think not."

"You don't scorn me, and point your face at me? Then you ought, for I
lived upon her and by her, and made no effort, while she took no rest,
working hard and always. But with it all she kept her health, like the
angels in heaven, and I grew ill and weak. I could not dance then. I
felt it to be impossible, though sometimes it came upon me that I
could; and then the remembrance of those nights, all alike, night
after night--I could not. Pray tell me now whether I am not worthless.
But I have no beauty; I am lost."

"Miss Lemark, if you were really lost, and had no beauty, it appears
to me that you would not complain about it; people do not, I assure
you, who are ugly or in despair. You are overdone, and you overrate
your little girlish follies; everything is touched by the color of
your thought, but is not really what it seems. Believe me,--as I
cannot but believe,--that your inaction arose from morbid feeling and
not too strong health; not from true want of energy or courage. You
are young, a great deal too young, to trust all you fancy, or even
feel; and you ought to be thankful there is nothing more for you to
regret than that weighing down your spirit. You will do everything we
expect and wish, when you become stronger,--a strong woman, I hope;
for remember, you are only a girl. Nor will you find that you are
less likely to succeed then because of this little voluntary of
_idlesse_."

"You are only speaking so because it is troublesome to you to be
addressed at all. You do not mean it; you are all music."

"There is only one who is all music, Miss Lemark."

She hid her face for many minutes; at last she looked up, and said
with more softness, a smile almost sweet:

"Mr. Auchester, I feel I am detaining you; let me beg you to sit
down."

I just got up on the side of the bed.

"That will do beautifully. And now, Miss Lemark, if I am to be your
doctor, you must go to sleep."

"Because I shall not talk? But I will not go to sleep, and I will
talk. What should you do if you were in my place, feeling as I do?"

"I do not know all."

"You may if you like."

"Then I may guess; at least, I may imagine all that I might feel if I
were in your place,--a delicate young lady who has been fainting for
the love of music."

"You are sneering; I do not mind that. I have seen such an expression
upon a face I admire more than yours. Suppose you felt you had seen--"

"What I could never forget, nor cease to love," I answered, fast and
eagerly; I _could_ not let her say it, or anything just there,--"I
should earnestly learn his nature, should fill myself to the brim with
his beauty, just as with his music. I should feel that in keeping my
heart pure, above all from envy, and my life most like his life, I
should be approaching nearer than any earthly tie could lead me,
should become worthy of his celestial communion, of his immortal, his
heavenly tendencies. Nor should I regret to suffer,--to suffer for his
sake."

I used these last words--themselves so well remembered--without
remembering who said them for me first, till I had fairly spoken; then
I, too, longed to weep: Maria's voice was trembling in my brain, a
ghostly music. As Laura answered, the ghostly music passed, even as a
wind shaken and scattered upon the sea. It was earth again, as vague,
scarcely less lonely!

"A worldly man would mock. You do not a much wiser thing, but you do
it for the best. I will try to hide it forever, for there is, indeed,
no hope."

Half imploring, this was hardly a question; yet I answered,--

"I do believe none."

"You are cold, not cruel. I would rather know the truth. Yes! I would
hide it forever; I will not even speak of it to you."

"Even from yourself hide it, if it must be hidden at all. And yet, I
always think that a hidden sorrow is the best companion we can have."

"I am very selfish. I know that if Miss Lawrence finds out I am with
you, you will not like it. You had better let me go downstairs."

"I will go myself, if you prefer to be alone; but you must not move."

"I must move,--I will not be found here; I had quite forgotten that. I
will go this moment."

I did not dream of her actually departing; but before I could
remonstrate further, she had planted herself lightly upon the carpet,
and looked as well as usual: it was nothing extraordinary to see her
pale. She smoothed her long hair at my glass, and arranged her dress;
she shook hands with me afterwards also, and then she left the room.




CHAPTER XVI.


I was really alone now, but had a variety of worrying thoughts,
hunting each other to death, but reproducing each other by thousands.
I was irate with Laura, though I felt very sad, but of all most vexed
that such an incident should have befallen my experience on that crown
of days. The awful power of a single soul struggled, in my
apprehension, with the vain weakness of a single heart. But more
overpowering than either was the sensation connecting the two. It was
a remembrance that I, too, might be called to suffer.

At last Miss Lawrence sent to know whether I chose my dinner. Her own
hour was six, and just at hand; but I felt so extremely disinclined to
eat that I thought I would refuse, and take a walk another way. Miss
Lawrence was one of those persons--gladdening souls are they!--who
mean exactly what they say, and expect you to say exactly what you
mean; thus I had no difficulty in explaining that I preferred to take
this walk, though it was not, after all, a walk _semplice_, for I was
bound to the cottage, and desired to reach it as soon as possible.

I met Miss Lawrence on the stairs, and she charged me to take care of
Laura. I could not refuse, of course, and we drove in one of those
delightful cabs that so effectually debar from connected conversation.
I was glad for once, though I need not have troubled myself to
descant, for Laura, in a great green veil, opened not her lips twice,
nor once looked towards me.

We dismissed the conveyance at the entrance of the hamlet, and walked
up together, still silent. It was about half-past seven then, and
vivid as at morning the atmosphere, if not the light. Unclouded
sunshine swept the clustered leaves of the intense June foliage,
heavy-tressed laburnum wore it instead of blossoms; but from the
secluded shade of the wayside gardens pierced the universal scent of
roses above all other fragrance except the limes, which hung their
golden bells out here and there, dropping their singular perfume all
lights alike.

I saw Seraphael's house first, and returned to it after leaving Laura
at that other white gate. All our windows were open, the breeze blew
over a desert of flowers,--all was "fairy-land forlorn." I felt
certain no one could be at home. I was right here. I could not enter.
I was drawn to that other gate,--I entered. Thoné opened the door,
looking quite as eastern in the western beams.

"Is Miss Benette at home?"

"I will see." For Thoné could spell out a little English now. She went
and saw.

"Yes, sir, to you; and she wishes to see you."

It was the first time Thoné had ever called me "sir," and I felt very
grand. A strange, subtile fancy, sweeter than the sweetest hope,
sprang daringly within me. But a crushing fear uprose, it swelled and
darkened,--my butterfly was broken upon that wheel; those rooms so
bright and festal, the air and sunshine falling upon clustered
flowers, upon evening freshness as at morning, were not, could not be,
for me! I advanced to the open piano, its glittering sheets outspread,
its smiling keys.

Hardly had I felt myself alone before one other entered. Alas, I was
still alone! Clara herself approached me, less calm than I had ever
seen her; her little hand was chilled as if by the rough kisses of an
eastern wind, though the south air fanned our summer; there was
agitation in her whole air, but more excitement. I had never seen her
excited; I had not been aware how strangely I should feel to see her
touched so deeply.

"Mr. Auchester, it must have been Heaven who sent you here to-night,
for I wanted to see you more than anybody, and was expecting some one
else. I never thought I should see you first; I wished it so very
much."

"Miss Benette, if it were in my power I would give you all you wish,
for the sake only of hearing you wish but once. I am grateful to be
able to fulfil your wishes in the very least degree. What is it
now?"--for her lip quivered like an infant's, and one tear stood in
each of her blue eyes. She wiped away those dew-drops that I would
have caught upon my heart, and answered, her voice of music all quiet
now,--

"I have had a strange letter from the gentleman you love so well. I do
not feel equal to what he asks,--that is, I am not deserving; but
still I must answer it; and after what you said to me last time you
were so kind as to talk to me, I do not think it right to overlook
it."

"I may not see the letter? I do not desire it; but suffer me to
understand clearly what it is about exactly, if you do not think me
too young, Miss Benette."

"Sir, I always feel as if you were older, and I rely upon you. I will
do as you please; I wish to do so only. This letter is to ask me to
marry him. Oh! how differently I felt when I was asked to marry Mr.
Davy!"

"Yes, I rather suppose so. You are ready to reply?"

"Not quite. I had not considered such a thing, and should have thought
first of marrying a king or an angel."

"He is above all kings, Miss Benette; and if he loves you, no angel's
happiness could be like your own. But is it so wholly unexpected?"

"I never imagined it, sir, for one single moment; nor could any woman
think he would prefer her. Of course, as he is above all others, he
has only to choose where he pleases."

I could not look at her as she spoke; I dared not trust myself,--the
most thrilling irony pointed her delicate, lovesome tones. I know not
that she knew it, but I did; it cut me far deeper than to the heart,
and through and through my spirit the wound made way. No tampering,
however, with "oil and balsams" here!

"Wherever he pleases, I should say. No one he could choose could fail
(I should imagine) in pleasing him to please herself."

She retorted, more tenderly: "I think it awful to remember that I may
not be worthy, that I may make him less happy than he now is, instead
of more so."

"Only love him!"

"But such a great difference! He will not always walk upon the earth.
I cannot be with him when he is up so high."

"I only say the same. He needs a companion for his earthly hours; then
only is it he is alone. His hours of elevation require no sympathy to
fill them; they are not solitude."

"I will do as you please, sir, for it must be right. Do you not wish
you were in my place?" She smiled softly upon me, just lifting her
lovely eyes.

"Miss Benette, I know no one but yourself who could fill those hours I
spoke of, nor any one but that beloved and glorious one who is worthy
to fill your heart _all_ hours. More I cannot say, for the whole
affair has taken me by surprise."

I had, indeed, been stricken by shock upon shock that day; but the
last remained to me when the wailings of misfortune, the echoes of my
bosom-music, alike had left my brain. I could not speak, and we both
sat silent, side by side, until the sun in setting streamed into the
room. Then, as I rose to lower the blind, and was absent from her at
the window, I heard a knock,--I had, or ought to have, expected it;
yet it turned me from head to foot, it thrilled me through and
through. I well knew the hand that had raised the echoes like a salute
of fairy cannon. I well knew the step that danced into the hall. I was
gone through the open window, not even looking back. I ran to the
bottom of the garden; I made for the Queen's highway; I walked
straight back to London.

There was a great party in Miss Lawrence's, I knew it from the corner
of the square; and I had to leave the lustrous darkness, the sleepy
stars and great suffusing moonshine, the very streets filled full and
overflowing with waftures of fragrances from the country, dim yet so
delicious, for that terrible drawing-room. I took advantage of the
excitement, however, that distressed me as it never burned before, to
plunge instantly into a duet for violin and piano; Miss Lawrence
calling me to her by the white spell of her waving hand the very
moment I entered at the drawing-room door. My duet, her noble playing,
made me myself, _as ever music saves her own_, and I conducted myself
rather less like a nightmare than I felt. The party consisted of
first-rate amateurs, the flower of the morning festival, both from
orchestra and audience,--all enchanted, all wordy, except my precious
Davy, who was very pale, and Starwood, whose eyes almost went into his
head with pain.

We all did our best, though. Starwood played most beautifully, and in
a style which made me glory over him. Davy sang, though his voice was
rather nervous. A great many people came up to me, but they got
nothing out of me. I could not descant upon my religion. When at
length they descended to supper,--a miscellaneous meal, which Miss
Lawrence always provided in great state,--I thought I might be
permitted to retire. Will it be believed that, half an hour
afterwards, hearing my sister and Davy come up leisurely to bed, and
peeping out to see them, I heard Millicent distinctly say, "I hope
baby is asleep"? I was to return with them on the morrow; but directly
after breakfast Miss Lawrence made me one of her signs, and led me
thereby, without controlling me hand or foot, out of the
breakfast-room. We were soon alone together in the studio.

"I thought you would like to be here this morning, for Seraphael has
promised to come and see it. I think myself that he will be rather
surprised."

I could not help smiling at her tone, it was so unaffectedly
satisfied.

"I should think he will, Miss Lawrence."

"I don't mean as to the merits of the picture, but because he does not
know it is--what shall I say?--historical, biographical, allegorical."

"You mean hieroglyphic?"

"Exactly."

"But he will not be likely to say anything about that part of it, will
he? Is he not too modest or too proud?"

"Why, one never can know what he can say or do. I should not wonder
the least in the world if he took the brushes up and put the eyes in
open."

I laughed. "Does he paint, though?"

"Between ourselves, Mr. Auchester, there is nothing he cannot do,--no
accomplishment in which he does not excel. He can paint, can design,
can model, can harmonize all languages into a language of his own. All
mysteries, all knowledge, all wisdom, we know too well,--too well,
indeed!--dwell with him, are of him. I am always afraid when I
consider these things. What a blessing to us and to all men if he
would only marry! We should keep him a little longer then."

"Do you think so? I am fearful it would make no real difference. There
is a point where all sympathy ceases."

Miss Lawrence shook her head, a lull came over the animation of her
manner; she hastened to arrange her scenery, now unique. She had
placed before the picture a velvet screen, deep emerald and grass-like
in its shade; this veil stood out alone, for she had cleared away all
signs of picture, sketch, or other frame besides. Nothing was in the
room but the picture on its lofty easel, and the loftier velvet shade.
I appreciated to the full the artist tact of the veil itself, and said
so.

"I think," was her reply, "it will be more likely to please him if I
keep him waiting a little bit, and his curiosity is touched a moment."

And then we went downstairs. Davy, who always had occupation on hand,
and would not have been destitute of duty on the shore of a desert
island, was absent in the city; Millicent, who had taken her work to a
window, was stitching the most delicate wristband in Europe, inside
the heavy satin curtain, as comfortably as in her tiny home. Miss
Lawrence went and stood by her, entertained her enchantingly,
eternally reminding her of her bliss by Mrs. Davying till I could but
laugh; but still my honored hostess was very impetuously excited, for
her eyes sparkled as most eyes only light by candle-shine or the
setting sun. She twisted the tassel of the blind, too, till I thought
the silk cord would have snapped; but Millicent only looked up
gratefully at her, without the slightest sign of astonishment or
mystification.

"Charles!" exclaimed my sister at length, when Miss Lawrence, fairly
exhausted with talking, was gathering up her gown into folds and
extempore plaits plaits--"Charles! you will be ready at two o'clock,
and we shall get home to tea."

I could not be angry with her for thinking of her baby, her little
house, her heaven of home; but there was a going back to winter for me
in the idea of going away. The music seemed dead, not slumbering, that
I had heard the day before. But is this strange? For there is a
slumber we call death. About half-past ten a footman fetched Miss
Lawrence. She touched my arm, apologizing to Millicent, though not
explaining, and we left the room together. She sent me onwards to the
studio, and went downstairs alone. I soon heard them coming
up,--indeed, I expected them directly; for Seraphael never waited for
anything, and never lost a moment. They were talking, and when he
entered he did not at first perceive me. His face was exquisite. A
charm softened the Hebrew keenness, that was not awful, like the
passion music stirring the hectic, or spreading its white light. He
was flushed, but more as a child that has been playing until it is
weary; his eyes, dilated, were of softer kindness than the brain gives
birth to,--his happy yet wayward smile, as if he rejoiced because
self-willing to rejoice. His clear gaze, his eager footstep, reminded
me of other days when he trembled on the verge of manhood; it was,
indeed, as a man that he shone before me that morning, and had never
shone before. They stood now before the screen, and I was astonished
at the utter self-possession of the paintress; she only watched his
face, and seemed to await his wishes.

"That screen is very beautiful velvet, and very beautifully made. Am I
never to look at anything else? Is nothing hidden behind it? I have
been very good, Miss Lawrence, and I waited very patiently; I do not
think I can wait any longer. May I pull it away?"

"Sir, most certainly. It is for you to do so at your pleasure. I am
not afraid either, though you will think me not over-modest."

Seraphael touched the screen,--it was massive, and resisted his little
hand; he became impatient. Miss Lawrence only laughed, but I rushed
out of my corner to help him. Before he looked at the picture he gave
me that little hand and a smile of his very own.

"Look, dearest sir!" I cried, "pray look now!"

And indeed he looked; and indeed, I shall not forget it. It was so
strange to turn from the living lineaments--the eye of the sun and
starlight, the brilliant paleness, the changeful glow, the look of
intense and concentrated vitality upon temple and lip and skin--to the
still, immortal visage, the aspect of glory beyond the grave, the
lustre unearthly, but not of death, that struck from those breathless
lips, those snow-sealed eyes; and, above all, to see that the light
seemed not to descend from the crown upon the forehead, but to aspire
from the forehead to the crown,--so the rays were mixed and fused
into the idea of that eternity in which there shall be a new earth
besides another heaven! That transcending picture, how would it affect
him? I little knew; for as he stood and gazed, he grew more like it.
The smile faded, the deep melancholy I had seldom seen, and never
without a shudder, swept back; as the sun goes into a cloud his face
assumed a darklier paleness, he appeared to suffer, but did not speak.
In some minutes still, he started, turned to Miss Lawrence, and
sighing gently, as gently said,--

"I wish I were more like it! I wish I were as that is! But we may not
dream dreams, though we may paint pictures. I should like to deserve
your idea, but I do not at present. Happy for us all who build upon
the future as you have done in that painting,--I mean entirely as to
the perfection of the work."

"Have I your permission to keep it, sir?"

"What else, madam, would you do with it?"

"Oh! if you had not approved, I should have slashed it into pieces
with a carving-knife or my father's razor. I shall keep it, with your
permission; it will be very valuable and precious, and I have to thank
you for the inestimable privilege of possessing it."

This cool treatment of Miss Lawrence's delighted me,--it was the only
one to restore our Chevalier. He, indeed, returned unto his rest, for
he left the house that moment. Nor could I have desired him to
remain,--there was only one presence in which I cared to imagine
him....




CHAPTER XVII


The day had come and gone when Clara, for the first time, dressed in
white. The sun-grain of August had kissed the corn, the
golden-drooping sheaves waved through the land fresh cut, and the
latest roses mixed pale amidst the lilies beneath the bounteous
harvest-moon when she left us,--but not alone. It was like dying twice
over to part with them that once, and therefore it will not be
believed how soon I could recover the farewell and feed upon Clara's
letters, which never failed me once a month. For a year they more
sustained me than anything else could have done; for they told of a
life secluded as any who loved _him_ could desire for him, and not
more free from pain than care. Of herself she never spoke, except to
breathe sweet wishes for her friends; but her whole soul seemed bent
upon his existence, and her descriptions were almost a diary. I could
not be astonished at her influence, for it had governed my best days;
but that she should be able to secure such a boon to us as a year of
unmitigated repose for him, was precisely what I had not anticipated,
nor dared to expect. Meanwhile, and during that year, our work was
harder than ever. Davy and I were quite unconscious of progressing,
yet were perfectly happy, and as ever determined,--indeed, nothing
like a slight contumacy on the part of the pupils kept Davy up to the
mark. From Starwood, who had returned to Germany, I also received
accounts; but he was no letter-writer, except when there was anything
very particular to say. He was still a student, and still under
Seraphael's roof. Strange and Arabian dreams were those I had of that
house in the heart of a country so far away, for the Chevalier had
moved nearer the Rhine, and nothing in his idiosyncrasy so betokened
the Oriental tincture of his blood as his restless fondness for making
many homes while he was actually at home in none.

We lived very happily, as I said. It was, perhaps, not extraordinary
that to my violin I grew more infinitely attached, was one with it,
and could scarcely divide myself from it. I lived at home still,--that
is, I slept at home, and usually ate there; but Davy's house was also
home,--it had grown dearer to me than ever, and was now fairer. The
summer after our friends had left us was brilliant as the last, and
now the shell was almost hidden by the clinging of the loveliest
creepers; the dahlias in the garden had given place to standard
rose-trees, and though Carlotta could not reach them, she had learned
to say, "Rose!" and to put up her pretty hand for me to pluck her one.
With a flower she would sit and play an entire morning, and we never
had any trouble with her. Millicent worked and studied as conveniently
as though she had never been born; for it was Davy's supreme wish to
educate his daughter at home, and her mamma had very elaborate ideas
of self-culture in anticipation. During that autumn we found ourselves
making some slight way. Davy took it into his head to give utterance,
for the first time, to a public concert; and I will not say I was
myself averse. We had a great deal of conversation and a great many
sessions on the subject, not exactly able to settle whether we would
undertake a selection or some entire work. Our people were rather
revived out of utter darkness concerning music; but its light was
little diffused, and seemed condensed in our class-room as a focus.
The band and chorus, of course, made great demonstrations in favor of
the "Messiah;" and my mother, who had taken an extraordinary interest
in the affair, said, innocently enough,--

"Then why, my dears, not represent the 'Messiah'? It will be at
Christmas time, and very suitable."

This was not the point, for Davy had reminded me of the fact that the
festival for the approaching year at the centre of the town would open
with that work,--unless, indeed, the committee departed from their
precedent on all former occasions. My idea would have been a
performance all Bach, Beethoven, and Seraphael, with Handel's Ode for
a commencement, on the 22d of November; but Davy shook his head at
me,--"That would be for Germany, not for England;" and I obliged
myself to believe him. At length we accepted the "Messiah,"--to the
great delight of the chorus and band.

It was a pressing time all through that autumn. I do not suppose I
ever thought of anything but fiddles, fiddles, fiddles, from morning
till night. They edged my dreams with music, and sometimes with that
which was very much the reverse of music; for we had our difficulties.
Prejudice is best destroyed by passion, which as yet we had not
kindled. Davy met with little support, and no sympathy, except from
his own,--this mattered little either, so long as his own were
concerned; but now, in prospect of our illustration, it was necessary
to secure certain instrumental assistance.

I undertook to do this. Besides my own strings, we had brass and wind,
but not sufficient. I shall not forget the difficulty of thawing the
players I visited--I will not call them artists--into anything like
genial participation. Their engagement was not sufficiently formal,
nor did they like me,--I suppose they owed a grudge against my youth;
for youth is unpardonable and inadmissible, except in the case of
genius. Neither did they thaw, any more than the weather, on Christmas
Eve,--it was on Christmas Eve we were to perform. It was an eve of
ice, not snow,--the blue sky silvery, the earth bound fast in sleep.
We had hired a ball-room at the chief hotel,--an elegant and rather
rare room; it was warmed by three wide fire-places; and the crimson
curtains closed, with the chairs instead of benches, gave a social and
unusual charm to the whole proceeding.

If our audience entered aghast, looked frozen, rolled in furs and
contempts, they could not help smiling upon the fires, the roseate
glow; though they also could not help being disconcerted to find
themselves treated all alike, for Davy would have no roseate seats,
nor any exclusiveness on this occasion. As he intended, besides, to
restore the work exactly as it was first written, we expected a little
cold and a few black looks. No modern listeners can receive an
oratorio as orthodox without an organ of Titan-build in the very
middle that takes care to sound.

The overture, beautifully played, was taken down with chill
politeness; but my own party were so pleased with themselves, and made
such ecstatic motions with their features that it was quite enough for
me. The first chorus was lightly, delicately shown up, not
extinguished by the orchestra--and, indeed, chorus after chorus found
no more favor; still, no one could help feeling the perfect training
here. I knew as well as Davy envy or pride alone kept back the free
confession. The exquisite shading in the chorus, the public's
darling, "Unto us a child is born," and the grandeur of the final
effect, subdued them a little. They cheered, and Davy gave me a glance
over his shoulder which I understood to say, "One must come in for
certain disadvantages if one is well received;" for Davy abhorred a
noise as much as I did. When we waited between the parts, some one
fetched Davy away in an immense hurry; he did not return immediately,
and I grew alarmed. I peeped into the concert-room: there sat
Millicent most composedly, and Lydia with her lord, and Clo in her
dove-colored silk and spectacles, and my mother in her black satin and
white-kid gloves, looking crowned with happiness; it was evident that
nothing was the matter at home. But having a few minutes, I went to
speak to them; and then my mother, in her surmises about Davy, whom
she loved as her own son--and Clo, whose principles were flattered,
not shocked, in her approval--took up so much time that I was at last
obliged to fly to my little band, who were assembled again, and tuning
by fits. Still, Davy was not there. But presently, and just at the
moment when it was necessary to begin, he appeared, so looking that I
was sure either something very dread or very joyous had befallen him.
His eye gazed brightly out to the whole room as he faced instead of
turning from it. He could not help smiling, and his voice quivered as
he spoke. He said in those fond accents,--

"I have the pleasure to announce that the Chevalier Seraphael, having
just arrived from Germany on a visit to myself, has consented to
conduct the second part himself."

I had been sure the Chevalier was in him before he spoke, but I little
thought how it would come about. Immediately he finished speaking,
the curtain above us divided, and that heavenly inspired one stood
before us.

There was that in his apparition which stirred the slowest and burned
upon the coldest pulses. All rose and shouted with an enthusiasm, when
elicited from English hearts perhaps more real and touching than any
other; a quickening change, like sudden summer, swept the room; the
music became infinitely at home there; we all felt as if, watching
over the dead, we had seen the dead alive again; the "old familiar
strains" untired us, and none either wearied among the listeners. I
could not, in the trances of my own playing, forbear to worship the
gentle knowledge that had led the hierarch to that humble shrine, to
consecrate and ennoble it forever. But the event told even sooner than
I expected; for lo! at the end, when the Chevalier turned his kingly
head and bowed to the reiterated applaudings, and had passed out,
those plaudits continued, and would not cease till Davy was recalled
himself; the pent-up reverence, restored to its proper channel, eddied
in streams around him.

What an evening we spent, or rather what a night we made that
night!--in that little parlor of Davy's the little green-house thrown
open, and lighted by Millicent with Carlotta's Christmas-candles; the
supper, where there was hardly room for us all at the table, and
hardly room upon the table for all the good things my mother sent for
from her pantry and larder and store-closet; the decoration of the
house with green wreaths and holly-bunches, the swept and garnished
air of the entire tiny premises standing us in such good stead to
welcome the Christmas visitant with Christmas festivity; the punch
Davy mixed in Carlotta's christening-bowl, my mother's present, she
perfectly radiant, and staring with satisfaction in the arm-chair,
where Seraphael himself had placed her as we closed around the fire;
the Christmas music never wanting, for in the midst of our joyous talk
a sudden celestial serenade, a deep-voiced carol, burst from beyond
the garden, and looking out there, we beheld, through rimed and
frost-glazed windows, a clustered throng, whose voices were not
uncultured,--the warmest-hearted members of Davy's own. They were
still singing when Carlotta awoke and cried, had to be brought down
stairs, and was hushed, listening, in Seraphael's arms.

So, after all, we did not go to bed that night, for it was quite two
o'clock when I escorted my mother and sisters home, having left the
little room I usually occupied when I slept at my brother's house for
Seraphael, whom no one would suffer to sleep at the hotel. I might
remind myself of the next day, too, and I surely may,--of our all
going to church together after a night of snow, over the sheeted white
beneath a cloudless heaven; of our all sitting together in that large
pew of ours, and the excitement prevailing among the congregation
afterwards as they assured themselves of our guest; of the chimes
swelling high from the tower as we returned, and my walk alone with
Seraphael to show him where Clara's house had stood. When we were,
indeed, alone together, I asked more especially after her, and
listened to his tender voice when it told of her that she was not then
strong enough to cross the sea, but that though he could only leave
her for a week, it was her latest request that he would come to see us
all himself, nor return without having done so. And then he spoke of
the affairs that had brought him over,--an entreaty from the committee
of our own town festival that he would direct that of the coming year,
and compose exclusively for it.

It made me very indignant at first that they should have kept Davy so
entirely in the dark as to their intentions, because he had been
forewarned on all previous occasions, before his influence was so
strong in his own circle. But when I expressed a little my
indignation, Seraphael only laughed, and said,--

"It was what every one must expect who was such a purist, unless he
would also condescend to amuse the people at times and seasons, or
unless he were not _poor_."

My obligation to accede here made me yet more indignant, until I
remembered how Seraphael had introduced himself, and so taken Davy by
the hand that it would not be likely for him ever again to be thrust
back into obscurity afterwards, were it only because Seraphael himself
was _rich_.

"And will you come to us, sir?" I asked, scarcely able to frame a wish
upon the subject.

"If I live, Carlomein. And I do hope to live--till then, at least. I
have also been rather idle lately, and must work. Indeed, I have
brought nothing with me, except a psalm or two for your brother. We
may write music to psalms, I suppose, Carlomein?"

"You may, sir, and, indeed, anybody may; for whatever is worthless
will be forgotten, and whatever is worthy will live forever."

"It is not that anything we offer can be worthy of the feet at which
we lay it, it is not that anything is sweet or sufficient for our
love's expression, but every little word of love and smile of love is
precious to us, and must be so to Love itself, I think. Only in music
now does God reveal himself as in the days of old; and I do believe,
Carlomein, that he, dwelling not in temples made with hands, yet
dwelleth there. I suppose it may be that as we make the music that
issues from the orchestra, or from the organ where all musics mingle,
so he makes the love that religion burns to utter, but that music, for
the musical, alone makes manifest. All worship is sacred, but that is
unutterably holy. How holy should the heart of the musician be!"

"Dearest sir, forgive me! If you had not spoken so, I could not have
presumed to ask you. But do you, therefore, object to write for the
stage, in its present promiscuous position among the arts?"

"Carlomein, the drama is my greatest delight. The dramatic genius I
would ever accept as a guide and standard; but from youth upwards, I
have ever abstained from writing for the stage. It does not suit me;
it is in some respects beyond me,--that is, as it ought to exist. But
my days are numbered,--I have lately known it; and to give forth opera
after opera would reduce my short span to a mere holiday task. I am
too happy, Carlomein, and to you I will say it,--too blest in that I
feel I can best express what others left to me because expression
failed them."

"Oh, dearest sir, it is so, and not alone in music, but in everything
you touch or tell us! Yet you are ours for years and years. I feel
it,--there is so much to be done, and you only can do it; so much to
learn yet of what you only can teach us. You cannot, you will not, and
are not going to leave us! I know it; I could not be so if I did not
know and feel it. You are looking better than when even first I saw
you--all those years ago."

"I am well, Carlomein,--I have never been ill. I do not know sickness,
though I have known sorrow,--thank God for that inexpressible mystery
in which his light is hidden! But, Carlomein, you speak as if it were
of all things the saddest thing to die! I know not that sensation; I
believe it to be mere sensation. Neither is this earth a
wilderness,--no weariness! There is not an air of spring that does not
make me long for death; the burdening gladness is too much for life,
and summer and winter call me. Eternity without years is ever present
with me, and the poor music they love so well, they love because it
comes to me from beyond the grave."

I could not hear him speak so; it killed me to all but a ravishment of
fear. I could not help saying, though I fear it was out of place,--

"There is one you must not leave; she cannot live without you."

"Carlomein, any one can live who is to live, and whoever is decreed
must die. There is no death for me,--I do not call it so; nor do I
believe that death could touch me. I mean I should not know it, for I
could not bear it; and I fear it not, for nothing we cannot bear is
given us to endure."

"Sir, if I did not revere too much every word you utter, I should say
that a morbid presentiment clouds your enthusiasm, and that you know
not what you say."

"Do I look morbid, Carlomein? That is an ugly word, and you deserve it
as much as I do, pale-face."

He laughed out joyously. I looked at him again. How his eyes radiated
their splendors, as an eastern starlight in a northern sky! How the
blossom-blushes rose upon his cheek! Health, joy, vitality, all the
flowers of manhood, the fairest laurels of an unsullied fame, shone
visionary about him. He seemed no earthling "born to die." I could not
but smile; still, it was at his beauty, not his mirth.

"Sir, you don't look much like a martyr now."

"Carlomein. I should rather be a martyr than a saint. The saints are
robed in glory, but the glory streams from heaven upon the martyr's
face." (Oh, he could feel no pain, with that light there; I know he
felt none.) "The saints wear lilies, or they dream so; and dream they
not the martyrs wear the roses,--have not the thorns pierced through
them? They are thornless roses there, for passion is made perfect."

"Sir, but I do think that the musician, if duteous, is meet for a
starry crown."

"And I could only think, when I saw that picture, that the crown was
not mine own; but I dreamed within myself that it should not be in
vain I desire to deserve the crown which I should wear, but not that
star-crown. Poetry may be forgiven for hiding sorrow in bliss, but it
is only music that hides bliss with sorrow. And see, Carlomein (for we
are in a tale of dreams just now, and both alone), there have been
martyrs for all faiths,--for love, for poetry, for patriotism, for
religion. Oh! for what cause, where passion strikes and stirs, have
there not been martyrs? But I think music has not many, and those were
discrowned of that glory by the other crown of Fame. Shall I die
young, and not be believed to have died for music? For that end must
the music be rapt and purified,--stolen from itself; its pleasures
must be strong to pain, its exercises sharper than agony. I know of
none other choice for myself than to press forwards to fulfil the call
I have heard since music spoke to me, and was as the voice of God.
There is so much to undo in very doing, while those who were not
called, but have only chosen music, defile her mysteries, that the few
who are called must surely witness for her. We will not speak again
so, Carlomein. I have made your young face careful, and I would rather
see scorn work upon it than such woe. I am now going to a shop. Are
there any shops here, Carlomein?"

"Plenty, sir, but they are closed; still, I am certain you can get
anything you want, no matter what."

"I have something to make to-night which is most important, and I must
have nuts, apples, and sugar-plums."

We went to a large confectioner's whose windows were but
semi-shuttered. Here the Chevalier quite lost himself in the treasures
of those glass magazines. I should scarcely have known him as he had
been. He chose very selectly, nathless, securing only the most
delicate and rare of the wonders spread about him, and which excited
his _naïveté_ to the utmost. His choice comprised all crisp white
comfits and red-rose ones, almond-eggs, the most ravishing French
bonbons, all sorts of chocolate, myriad sugar millions, like rain from
fairy rainbows, twisted green angelica, golden strips of crystallized
orange-peal, not to speak of rout-cakes like fish and frogs and mice
and birds' nests. Nor did these suffice; off we walked to the
toy-shop. Our town was of world renown for its toys. Here it was not
so easy to effect an entrance; but it _was_ effected the moment the
Chevalier showed his face. To this hour I believe they took him in
there for some extraordinary little boy,--he certainly behaved like
nothing else. He bought now beads of all colors, and spangles and
shining leaf, and of all things the most exquisite doll,
small-featured, waxen, dressed already in long white robes, and lying
in a cradle about a foot long, perfectly finished. And next, besides
this baby's baby, he snatched at a box of letters, then at a gilt
watch, and finally at a magic-lantern. We so loaded ourselves with all
these baubles that we could scarcely get along; for, with his wonted
impetuosity on the least occasions, he would not suffer anything to be
sent, lest it should not arrive in time. And then, though I reminded
him of the dinner-hour at hand, there was to be no rest yet, but I
must take him to some garden or nursery of winter-plants. Fortunately,
a great friend of Davy's in that line lived very near him; for Davy
was a great flower-fancier. This was convenient; for had it been two
miles off, Seraphael would have run there, being in his uttermost
wayward mood. He chose a gem of a fir-tree, and though both the
florist and I remonstrated with our whole hearts, would carry it
himself,--happily not very far. I was reminded of dear old Aronach's
story about his child-days as I saw him clasp it in his delicate arms
so nerved with power, and caught his brilliant face through the spires
of the foliage. Thus we approached Davy's house, and I reminded the
Chevalier that we were expected to dine at my mother's, not there. In
fact, poor Millicent, in her bonnet, looked out anxiously from the
door; the Chevalier called to her as she ran to open the gate, "See,
Mrs. Davy, see! Here's 'Birnam Wood come to Dunisnane.' Make way!"

"You are very naughty," said Davy, stepping forth. "Our beloved mamma
will be coming after us."

"It is very rude, I know; but I am going to dine with your daughter."

"My daughter is coming too. Did you think we should leave her behind?"

Millicent was about, in fact, to mount the stairs for the baby; but
Seraphael rushed past her.

"Pardon! but I don't wish to be seen at present;" and we both bore our
burdens into the parlor, and laid them on the table.

"Now, Carlomein, the moment dinner is over, we two shall come back and
lock ourselves in here."

"I should like it of all things, sir, selfish wretch that I am! but I
don't think they will."

"Oh, yes, I will make them!"

When at last we descended ready, Carlotta, in her white beaver bonnet,
my own present, looked as soft as any snowdrop,--too soft almost to be
kissed. She held out her arms to Seraphael so very pertinaciously that
he was obliged to carry her; nor would he give her up until we reached
my mother's door. It was quite the same at dinner also; she would sit
next him, would stick her tiny fork into his face, with a morsel of
turkey at the end of it, would poke crumbs into his mouth with her
finger, would put up her lips to kiss him, would say, every moment, "I
like you much-much!" with all Davy's earnestness, though with just so
much of her mother's modesty as made her turn pink and shy, and put
herself completely over her chair into Seraphael's lap, when he
laughed at her. He was in ecstasies, and every now and then a shade so
tender stole upon his air that I knew he could only be adverting to
the tenderest of all human probabilities,--the dream of his next
year's offspring.

After dinner, Miss was to retire. She was carried upstairs by
Margareth, of whom I can only say she loved Carlotta better than she
had loved Carl. Seraphael then arose, and gracefully, gleefully,
despite the solicitations on all hands exhibited, declared he must
also go, that he had to meet the Lord Chancellor, and could not keep
him waiting. There was no more prayer wasted after this announcement,
everybody laughed too much. Taking a handful of nuts from a dish, and
throwing a glance of inexpressible elfishness at my mother, he said,
"Carl and the Lord Chancellor and I are going to crack them in a
corner. Come, Carlomein! we must not keep so grand a person waiting."
I know not what blank he left behind him, but I know what a world he
carried with him. We had such an afternoon! But we had to be really
very busy; I never worked so hard in a small way. When all was
finished, the guilt fruit hung, the necklaces festooned, the glitter
ordered with that miraculous rapidity in which he surpassed all
others, and that fairy craft of his by which he was enabled to
re-create all Arabian, mystical, he placed the cradle in the shade.

"You see, Carlomein, I could not have a Christ-child up there at the
top, because your brother is rather particular, and might not choose
to approve. It will never occur to him about the manger, if we don't
tell him; but you perceive all the same that it is here, being made of
straw, and very orthodox."

"It appears to me, sir, that you have learned English customs to some
purpose, as well as German."

He replied by dancing round the tree, and twisting in the tapers red
and green.

"Now, you go, Carlomein, and fetch them all, and when I hear your
voices, I will light the candles. Begone, Carlomeinus!" and he snapped
his fingers.

They came immediately, all rather mystified, but very curious. I
carried Carlotta, who talked the whole way home about the stars. But
after clustering a few moments in the dark passage, and her little
whispered "ohs!" and wondering sighs, when the door was opened, and
the arch musician for all ages, seated at the piano, played a measure
only meet for child or fairy ears, her ecstasy became quite painful.
She shuddered and shivered, and at last screamed outright; and then,
even then, only Seraphael had power to soothe her, leading her to the
fairy earth-lights as he led us to the lights of heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

Glorious hours that dye deep our memories in beauty, music that passes
into echo and is silent, alike are conserved forever. Often and often
in the months that passed when he had left us, after a visit so
exquisite that it might have been diffused millenniums and yet have
kept its fragrance, did my thoughts take such a form as this
enunciation bears; I was so unutterably grateful for what had happened
that it helped me to bear what was yet before me. The growing, glowing
fame, heralded from land to land, in praise of that young genius and
purest youth, had certainly reached its culmination; neither envy
withered nor scandal darkened the spell of his perfect name. All
grades of artists, all ranks of critics,--the old and calm, the
impertinent but impetuous young,--bowed as in heart before him. It was
so in every city, I believe; but in ours it was peculiar, as well as
universal. An odor of heavenly altars had swept our temple; we were
fitter to receive him than we had been. In no instance was this shown
more clearly than on the fortunate occasion when Davy was treated
with, and requested very humbly to add his vocal regiment to the
festival chorus. One day just afterwards, in early April, he came
running to me with a letter, anxious for me to open it, as he was in a
fit of fright about the parts which ought to have arrived, and had
not. It was only a line or two, addressed to me by Seraphael's hand,
to tell us that Clara had borne him twin sons.

Davy's astonishment amused me; it appeared that he had formed no idea
of their having been likely to come at all, until this moment. I was
glad, indeed, to be alone, to think of that fairest friend of mine,
now so singularly blest. I thought of her in bed with her babies, I
thought of the babies being his, and she no less his own, until I was
not fit company for any one,--and it was long before I became so. I
could hardly believe it, and more especially because they were all
four so far away; for I am not of the opinion of those fortunate
transcendentalists, who aver we can better realize that which is away
from us than that which is at hand. Time and space must remain to us
our eternity and our freedom, till freedom and eternity shall be our
own.




CHAPTER XVIII


We were extremely busy, for a little while, in preparing a box of
presents, and when it was despatched we began seriously to anticipate
our awful, glorious festival; we began to have leisure to contemplate
it. It was a delightful dream, amidst that dream, to reflect that we
should see them all then, for Seraphael sent us word, in his grateful
reply to our enclosures, that both his children and their mother would
accompany him. Meantime, I was very anxious to spread the news abroad,
and most extraordinary appointments were made by all kinds of people
to secure places. I began to think, and had I been in Germany should,
of course, have settled to my own satisfaction, that the performances
must be in the open air, after all, such crowds demanded admittance so
early as early in June. It was for the last week in July that our
triple day was fixed, and in the second week of June the long-expected
treasure, the exclusive compositions, arrived from Lilienstadt. Davy
was one of the committee called immediately, and I awaited, in
unuttered longing, his return, to hear our glorious doom.

He came back almost wild. I was quite alarmed, and told him so.

"Charles," he said, "there is almost reason; so am I, myself, in fact.
Just listen to the contents of the parcel received,--an oratorio for
the first morning (such a subject, 'Heaven and Earth'!); a cantata for
a double choir; an organ symphony, with interludes for voices only; a
sonata for the violin; a group of songs and fancies. The last are for
the evenings; but otherwise the evenings are to be filled with Bach,
Beethoven, Mozart, and Handel,--the programmes already made out. How
is it possible, Charles, that such progress can have been condensed
into a few mere months? Think of the excitement, the unmitigated
stress of such an industry! Three completed works in less than a
quarter of a year, not to speak of the lesser wonders!"

It seemed to affect Davy's brain; as for me, I felt sure the works had
stirred,--as the Spirit moving upon the face of the waters, before the
intermomentary light, long ages, as we reckon in this world's
computation, before they framed themselves into form. Nor was this
conviction lessened when I first became acquainted with the new-born
glories of an imagination on fire of heaven.

Seraphael came to England, and of course northwards, to superintend
the earliest rehearsals; it was his own wish to do so, and every one
felt it necessary to be introduced by him alone to what came alone of
him. Those were strange times,--I do not seem to have lived them,
though in fact I was bodily present in that hall, consecrated by the
passion of a child. But they were wild hours; all tempest-tossed was
my spirit amidst the rush of a manifold enthusiasm.

Seraphael was so anxious to be at his home again that the rehearsals
were conducted daily. He was to return again, having departed, for
their ultimate fulfilment. It appeared very remarkable that he should
not have taken the whole affair at once, have brought his family over
then, and there remained; but upon the subject he was unapproachable,
only saying, with relation to his arduous life just then and then to
be, that he could not be too much occupied to please himself.

He did not stay in our house this time; we could not press him to do
so, for he was evidently in that state to which the claims of
friendship may become a burden instead of a beguiling joy. He was
alone greatly at his hotel, though I can for myself say that in his
intercourse with me, his gentleness towards me was so sweet that I
dare not remind myself of it. Still, in all he said and did there was
something seeming to be that was not; an indescribable want of
interest in the charms of existence which he had ever drawn into his
bosom,--a constant endeavor to rouse from a manifest abstraction.
Notwithstanding, he still wore the air of the most perfect health, nor
did I construe those signs, except into the fact of his being absent
from his new-found, his endeared and delighted home. He left us so
suddenly that I was only just in time to see him off. He would not
permit me to accompany him to London, from whence he should instantly
embark; but it was a letter from Clara that really hastened his
departure,--his babes were ill. I could not gain from him the least
idea of their affection, nor whether there was cause for fear; his
face expressed alarm, but had an unutterable look besides,--a look
which certainly astonished me, for it might have bespoken
indifference, as it might bespeak despair. One smile I caught as he
departed, that was neither indifferent nor desolate; it wrung my heart
with happiness to reflect that smile had been for me.

The feeling I had for those unknown babies was inexplicable after he
was fairly gone. That I should have loved them, though unseen, was
scarcely strange, for they were the offspring of the two I loved best
on earth; but I longed and languished for one glimpse of their baby
faces just in proportion to the haunting certainty which clutched me
that those baby faces I should never see. Their beauty had been
Seraphael's only inspiration when, in conversation with me, he had
fully seemed himself: the one so light and clear, with eyes as the
blue of midnight,--his brow, her eyes; the other soft and roseate,
with her angel forehead and his own star-like gaze,--her smile upon
them both, and the features both of him. As one who reads of the
slaughtered darlings in the days of Herod, as one who pores on
chronicles of the cradle plague-smitten, I felt for them; they seemed
never to have been born, to me.

Oh, that they had never been born, indeed! At least, there was one
while I thought so. We had a heart-rending letter from Clara one
fortnight after her lord returned to her: the twins were both dead,
and by that time both buried in the same grave. With her pure
self-forgetfulness where another suffered, she spoke no word of her
own sorrow, but she could not conceal from us how fearfully the blow
had fallen upon him. The little she said made us all draw close
together and tremble with an emotion we could not confess. But the
letter concluded with an assurance of his supreme and undaunted
intention, undisturbed by the shocks and agonies of unexpected woe, to
undertake the conductorship of the festival. The sorrow that now
shadowed expectations which had been too bright, tempered also our
joy, too keen till then. But after a week or two, when we received no
further tidings, we began absolutely to expect him, and with a
stronger anticipation--infatuation--than ever, built upon a future
which no man may dare to call his own, either for good or evil. The
hottest summer I had ever known interfered not with the industry alike
of band and chorus. The intense beauty of the music and its
marvellous embodiments had fascinated the very country far and wide;
it was as if art stood still and waited even for him who had magnified
her above the trumpery standards of her precedented progress.

We were daily expecting a significant assurance that he was on our
very shores. I was myself beginning to tremble in the air of sorrow
that must necessarily surround them both, himself and his companion,
when, one morning,--I forget the date; may I never remember it!--I was
reflecting upon the contents of a paper which Davy took in every
week,--a chronicle of musical events, which I ransacked
conscientiously, though it was seldom much to the purpose. Strangely
enough, I had been reading of the success of another friend of
mine,--even Laura, who had not denied herself the privilege of
artist-masonry after all, for she was dancing amidst flowers and fairy
elements, and I was determining I would, at the first opportunity, go
to see her. Then I considered I should like her to come to the
festival, and was making up a letter of requests to my ever-generous
friend, Miss Lawrence, that she might bring Laura, as I knew she would
be willing, when a letter came for me, was brought by an unconscious
servant and laid between my hands. It was in Clara's writing, once
again. I was coward enough to spare myself a few moments. There was no
one in the room; I was just on the wing to my band, but I could not
help still sparing myself a little, and a very little, longer. I
believe I knew as well what was in the letter as if I had opened it
before I broke the seal. I believe terror and intense presentiment
lent me that stillness and steadiness of perception which are the very
empyrean of sorrow. Enough! I opened it at last, and found it exactly
as I had expected,--Seraphael himself was ill. The hurry and trouble
of the letter induced me to believe there was more behind her words
than in them, mournful and unsatisfactory as they were. He was, as he
believed himself to be, overwrought; and though he considered himself
in no peril, he must have quiet. This struck me most; it was all over
if he felt he must have quiet. But the stunning point was that he
deputed his friend Lenhart Davy to the conductorship of his own
works,--the concerts all being arranged by himself in preparation, and
nothing but a director being required. Clara concluded by asking me to
come to her if I could. She did not say he wished to see me, but I
knew she wished to see me herself; and even for his sake that call was
enough for me.

My duties, my intentions, all lay in the dust. I considered but how to
make way thither with the speed that one fain would change to wind, to
lightning, or yoke to them as steeds. I packed up nothing, nor did I
leave a single trace of myself behind, except Clara's letter and a
postscript, in pencil, of my own. I was in my mother's house when the
letter came upon me; and flying past Davy's on my way to the railroad,
I saw Millicent with Carlotta looking out of one of the windows, all
framed in roses. It was a sight I merely recall as we recall touches
of pathos to medicine us for deeper sorrow. Two days and nights I
travelled incessantly, without information or help, solitary as a
pilgrim who is wandering from home to heaven; it could be nothing
else, I knew. The burning, glowing summer, the tossing forests, the
corn-fields yet unravished, the glory on the crested lime-trees, the
vines smothering rock and wall and terrace with fruit of life,--all
these I saw, and many other dreams, as a dream myself I passed. I
only know I seemed taking the whole world. So wide the scattered
sensations spread themselves that I dared not call home to myself; for
they did but minister to the perfect appreciation that what I dreamed
was true, and what I yearned to clasp as truth a dream.

The city of his home was before me,--but how can I call it a city? It
was a nest itself in a nest of hills. Below the river rushed, its
music ever in a sleep, and its blue waves softened hyaline by
distance. In the last sunset smile I saw the river and the valley, the
vines at hand crawled over it, and there was not a house around that
was not veiled in flowers. When I entered the valley from below, the
purple evening had drowned the sunset as with a sea, there was no mist
nor cloud, the starlight was all pure, it brightened moment by moment.
And having hurried all along till now, at length I rested. For now I
felt that of all I had ever endured, the approaching crisis was the
consummation. Had I dared, I would have returned; for I even desired
not to advance. My own utter impotence, my unavailing presence,
weighed me down, and the might of my passion ensphered me as did that
distant starlight,--I was as nothing to itself. I had shed no tears.
Tears I have ever found the springs of gladness, and grief most dry.
But who could weep in that breathless expectation? who would not, when
he cannot, rejoice to weep? Brighter than I had ever seen them, the
stars shone on me; and brighter and brighter they seemed to burn
through the crystal clarity of my perception: my ear felt open, I
heard sounds born of silence which, indeed, were no sounds, but
_themselves_ silence. I saw the unknown which, indeed, could not be
seen; and thus I waited, suspended in the midst of time, yearning for
some heaven to open and take me in. Whatever air stirred was soft as
the pulse of sleep; whatever sigh it carried was a sigh of flowers,
late summer sweetness, first autumn sadness, poured into faint
embrace. I saw the church-tower in the valley, it reached me as a
dream. All was a dream round about,--the dark shade of the terraced
houses, the shadier trees; and I myself the dreamer, to whom those
stars above, those heights so unimaginable, were the only waking day.
At midnight I had not moved, and at midnight I dreamed another dream,
still standing there.

The midnight hour had struck, and died along the valley into the
quiet, when a sudden gathering gleam behind a distant rock rose like a
red moonlight and tinged the very sky. But there was no moon, and I
felt afraid and child-like. I was obliged to watch to ascertain. It
grew into a glare, that gleam,--the glare of fire; and slowly, stilly
as even in a dream indeed, wound about the rock and passed down along
the valley a dark procession, bearing torches, with a darker in the
midst of them than they.

Down the valley to the church they came: I knew they were for resting
there. No bell caught up the silence, I heard no tramp of feet, they
might have been spirits for all the sound they made; and when at last
they paused beneath me in the night, the torches streamed all
steadily, and rained their flaming smiles upon the imagery in the
midst.

That bier was carried proudly, as of a warrior called from deadly
strife to death's own sleep. But not as warrior's its ornaments, its
crown. The velvet folds passed beneath into the dark grass as they
paused, as storm-clouds rolling softly, as gloom itself at rest. But
above, from the face of the bier, the darkness fled away,--it was
covered with a mask of flowers. Wreath within wreath lay there, hue
within hue, from virgin white and hopeful azure to the youngest blush
of love. And in the very midst, next the pale roses and their tender
green, a garland of the deepest crimson glowed, leafless, brilliant,
vivid; the full petals, the orb-like glory, gave out such splendors to
the flame-light that the fresh first youth's blood of a dauntless
heart was alone the suggestion of its symbol. Keenly in the distance
the clear vision, the blaze of softness, reached me. I stirred not, I
rushed not forwards; I joined in the dread feast afar. I stood as
between the living and the dead,--the dead below, the living with the
stars above,--and the plague of my heart was stayed.

I waited until the bier, bare of its gentle burden, stood lonely by
the grave. I waited until the wreaths, flung in, covered the treasure
with their kisses that was a jewel for earth to hide. I saw the
torches thrown into the abyss, quenched by the kisses of the flowers,
even as the earthly joy, the beauty, had been quenched in that abyss
of light which to us is only darkness. I watched the black shadows
draw closer round the grave; one suffocating cry arose, as if all
hearts were broken in that spasm, or as if Music herself had given up
the ghost. _But Music never dies._ In reply to that sickening shout,
as if, indeed, a heaven opened to receive me, a burst, a peal, a shock
of transcendent music fell from some distant height. I saw no sign the
while I heard, nor was it a mourning strain. Triumphant, jubilant,
sublime in seraph sweetness, joy immortal, it mingled into the arms of
Night. While yet its echoes rang, another strain made way, came forth
to meet it, and melted into its embrace, as jubilant as blissful, but
farther, fainter, more ineffable. Again it yielded to the echoes; but
above those echoes swelled another, a softer, and yet another and a
softer voice, that was but the mingling of many voices, now far and
far away. Distantly, dyingly, till death drank distance up, the music
wandered. And at length, when the mystic spell was broken, and I could
hear no more, I could only believe it still went on and on, sounding
through all the earth, beyond my ear, and rising up to heaven from
shores of lands untraversed as that country beyond the grave! All
peace came there upon me; as a waveless deep it welled up and upwards
from my spirit, till I dared no longer sorrow: my love was
dispossessed of fear, and the demon Despair, exorcised, fled as one
who wept and fain would hide his weeping. And yet that hope, if hope
it could be, that cooled my heart and cheered my spirit, was not a
hope of earth. My faith had fleeted as an angel into the light, and
that hope alone stayed by me.

It was not until the next morning, and then not early, that I visited
that house and the spirit now within it whose living voice had called
me thither. No longer timidly, if most tenderly, I advanced along the
valley, past the church which guarded now the spot on all this earth
the most like heaven, and found the mansion, now untenanted, that
Heaven itself had robbed. Quiet stillness--not as of death, but most
like new-born wonder--possessed that house. The overhanging balconies,
the sunburst on the garden, the fresh carnations, the carved gateway,
the shaded window, and over all the cloudless sky, and around, all
that breathed and lived,--it was a lay beyond all poetry, and such a
melancholy may never music utter. Thoné took me in, and I believe she
had waited for me at the door. She spoke not, and I spoke not; she led
me only forwards with the air of one who feels all words are lost
between those who understand but cannot benefit each other. She led
me to a room in which she left me; but I was not to be alone. I saw
Clara instantly,--she came to meet me from the window, unchanged as
the summer-land without by the tension or the touch of trouble. I
could not possibly believe, as I saw her, and seeing her felt my
courage flow back, my life resume its current, that she had ever
really suffered. Her face so calm was not pale; her eye so clear was
tearless. Nor was there that writhing smile about her lovely lips that
is more agonizing than any tears. It was entirely in vain I tried to
speak,--had she required comfort, my words would have thronged at my
will; but if any there required comfort, it could not be herself.
Seeing my fearful agitation, which would work through all my silence,
her sweet voice startled me; I listened as to an angel, or as to an
angel I should never have listened.

"If I had known how it would be, I would never have been so rash as to
send for you. But he was so strange--for he did not suffer--that I
could not think he was going to die. I do not call it dying, nor would
you if you had seen it. I wish I could make that darling feel such
death was better than to live."

I put a constraint upon myself which no other presence could have
brought me to exhibit.

"What darling, then?" said I; for I could only think of one who was
darling as well as king.

"Poor Starwood! But you will be able to comfort him,--you are the only
person who could."

"Perhaps it would not be kind to comfort him; perhaps he would rather
suffer. But I will do my best to please you. Where is he now?"

"I will bring him;" and she left the room.

In another moment, all through the sunny light that despite the shaded
windows streamed through the very shade, she entered again with
Starwood. He flew at me and sank upon the ground. I have seen
women--many--weep, and some few men; but I have never seen, and may I
never see! such weeping as he wept. Tears--as if tropic rains should
drench our Northern gardens--seemed dissolving with his very life his
gentle temperament. I could not rouse nor raise him. His sodden hair,
his hands as damp as death, his dreadful sobs, his moans of misery,
his very crushed and helpless attitude, appealed to me not in vain;
for I felt at once it was the only thing to do for him that he should
be suffered to weep till he was satisfied, or till he could weep no
more. And yet his tears provoked not mine, but rather drove them
inwards and froze them to my heart. Nor did Clara weep; but I could
not absolutely say whether she had already wept or not,--for where
other eyes grow dim, hers grew only brighter; and weeping--had she
wept--had only cleared her heaven. We sat for hours in that room
together,--that fair but dreadful room, its brilliant furniture
unworn, its frescos delicate as any dream, its busts, its pictures,
crowding calm lights and glorious colors, all fresh as the face of
Nature, with home upon its every look; save only where the organ
towered, and muffling in dark velvet its keys and pipes, reminded us
that music had left home for heaven, and we might no more find it
there!

And again it was longed-for evening,--the twilight tarried not. It
crept, it came, it fell upon the death-struck, woful valley. O blessed
hour,--the repose alike of passion and of grief! O blessed heaven! to
have softened the mystic change from day to darkness so that we can
bear them both,--never so blessed as when the broken-hearted seek thy
twilights and find refreshment in thy shades! At that hour we two
alone stood together by the glorious grave. For the first time, as the
sun descended, Starwood had left off weeping. I had myself put him in
his bed, and rested beside him till he was asleep; then I had returned
to Clara. She was wrapped in black, waiting for me. We went together
without speaking, without signifying our intentions to each other; but
we both took the same way, and stood, where I have said, together; and
when we had kissed the ground she spoke. She had not spoken all the
day,--most grave and serious had been her air; she yet looked more as
a child that had lost its father than a widowed wife,--as if she had
never been married, she struck me: an almost virgin air possessed her,
an unserene reserve, for now her accents faltered.

"I could not say to you till we were alone," she said,--"and we could
not be alone to-day,--how much I thank you for coming; so many persons
are to be here in a day or two, and I wish to consult with you."

"I will see them all for you, I will arrange everything; but you are
not going away?"

"Going away? And you to say so, too! I will never leave this place
until I die!"

"You love him, then, thank God!"

"Love him! Shall I tell you how? You know best what it was to love
him, for you loved him best,--better than I did; and yet I loved him
with all love. Do I look older, and more like this world, or less?"

She smiled a sweet significance,--a smile she had learned from him.

"I have been thinking how young you look,--too young, almost. You are
so fresh, so child-like, and--may I say it?--so fair."

"You may say anything. I think I have grown fairer myself. Very
strange to confess, is it? But you are my friend,--to you I should
confess anything. I have been with a spirit-angel,--no wonder I am
fresh. I have been in heaven,--no wonder I am fair. I felt myself grow
better hour by hour. After I left you with him, when his arms were
round me, when he kissed me, when his tenderness oppressed me,--I felt
raised to God. No heart ever was so pure, so overflowing with the
light of heaven. I can only believe I have been in heaven, and have
fallen here,--not that he has left me, and I must follow him to find
him. I will not follow yet, my friend! I have much to do that he has
left me."

"Thank God, you will not leave us,--but more, because you love him,
and made him happy!"

"You do not, perhaps, know that he was never anything but happy. When
I think of discontent and envy and hatred and anger and care, and see
them painted upon other faces, I feel that he must have tasted heaven
to have made himself so happy here. I can fancy a single taste of
heaven, sir, lasting a whole life long."

She was his taste of heaven, as a foretaste even to me! But had she,
indeed, never learned the secret of his memory, or had she turned,
indeed, its darkness into light?

"I wish to hear about the last."

"You know nearly as much as I do, or as I can tell you. You remember
the music you heard last night? It was the last he wrote, and I found
it and saved it, and had done with it what you heard."

But I cannot descant on death-beds; it is the only theme which I dare
believe, if I were to touch, would scare me at my dying hour. I will
not tamper with those scenes, but console myself by reminding that if
the time had been, and that, too, lately, when upon that brain fell
the light in fever and the sun in fire, the time was over; and
sightless, painless, deaf to the farewells of dying music, he, indeed,
could not be said to _suffer_ death.

Nor did he _know_ to suffer it, as he had said. The crown that,
piercing with its _fiery thorns_ unfelt, had pressed into his brow the
death-sting, should also crown with its _star-flowers_ the waking unto
life.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You remember what you said, Mr. Auchester, that he needed a
'companion for his earthly hours:' I tried to be his companion,--he
allowed me to be so; and one of the last times he spoke he said:
'Thank Carl for giving you to me.'"


That echo reaches me from the summer-night of sadness and still
communion, of _passion's slumber by the dead_. It is now some years
ago; but never was any love so fresh to the spirit it enchanted, as is
the enchantment of this sorrow, still mine own. So be it ever mine,
till all shall be forever!


I am in England, and again at home. Great changes have swept the
earth; I know of none within myself. Through all convulsions the music
whispers to me _that music is_. I ought to believe in its existence,
for it is my own life and the life of the living round me. Davy is
still at work, but not alone in hope,--sometimes in the midst of
triumph. They tell me I shall never grow rich, but with my violin I
shall never be poor. I have more than enough for everything, as far
as I myself am concerned; and as for those I love, there is not one
who prospers not, even by means of music.

Starwood has been three years in London. His name, enfolded in another
name, brought the whole force of music to his feet. It is not easy to
procure lessons of the young professor, who can only afford twenty
minutes to the most exacting pupil. It is still less easy to hear him
play in public, for he has a will of his own, and will only play what
he likes, and only what he likes to the people he likes; for he is a
bit of a cynic, and does not believe, half so much as I do, that music
is making way. He married his first feminine pupil,--a girl of almost
fabulous beauty. I believe he gave her half-a-dozen lessons before the
crisis,--not any afterwards; and I know that he was seventeen and she
fifteen years of age at the time they married.[10] His whole nature is
spent upon her; but she is kind enough to like me, and thus I
sometimes receive an invitation, which I should accept did they reside
in the moon.

But I have other London friends. After two seasons, more satisfactory
than brilliant, Laura retired from the stage. During the time she
danced, her name was scarcely whispered,--I believe she was even
feared in her spiritual exaltation of her art; but no sooner had she
left the lights than all critics and contemporaries discovered her
excellences. She was wooed with the white-flower garlands of the
purest honor, with the gold so few despised, to return and resume her
career, now certain fame; but she was never won, and I have since
made clear to myself that she only danced in public until she had
raised a certain capital, for you will only find her now in her
graceful drawing-room where London is most secluded, surrounded by the
most graceful and loveliest of the children of the peerage. No one but
Mademoiselle Lauretta--her stage and professional name--prepares the
little rarities for transplantation into the court-garden, or
rehearses the quadrille for the Prince of Wales's birthnight-ball. I
believe Miss Lemark, as she is known still to me, or even Laura, might
have had many homes if she had chosen,--homes where she could not but
have felt at home. Clara was even importunate that she should live
with her in Germany; Miss Lawrence was excessively indignant at being
refused herself; and there have been worthy gentlemen, shades not to
be invoked or recognized, who would have been very thankful to be
allowed to dream of that pale brow veiled, those clear eyes downcast,
those tapering fingers twined in theirs. But Laura, like myself, will
_never_ marry.

For Miss Lawrence, too, that glorious friend of mine, I must have a
little corner. It was Miss Lawrence who carried to Laura the news of
Seraphael's death,--herself heart-broken, who bound up that bleeding
heart. It is Miss Lawrence whose secretive and peculiar generosity so
permeates the heart of music in London that no true musician is
actually ever poor. It is Miss Lawrence who, disdaining
subscription-lists, steps unseen through every embarrassment where
those languish who are too proud or too humble to complain, and leaves
that behind her which re-assures and re-establishes by the magic of
charity strewn from her artist-hand. It is Miss Lawrence who discerns
the temporality of art to be that which is as inevitable as its
spiritual necessity; who yet ministers to its uttermost spiritual
appreciation by her patronage of the highest only. It is Miss Lawrence
you see wherever music is to be heard, with her noble brow and
sublimely beneficent eyes, her careless costume, and music-beaming
lips; but you cannot know, as I do, what it is to have her for a
friend.

Miss Lawrence certainly lost caste by receiving and entertaining, as
she did, Mademoiselle Lauretta; for both when Laura was dancing before
the public and had done with so dancing, Miss Lawrence would insist
upon her appearing at every party or assembly she gave,--whether with
her father's sanction or without, nobody knew. To be introduced to a
ballet-girl, or even a dancing-lady, at the same table or upon the
same carpet with barristers and baronets, with golden-hearted bankers
and "earnest" men of letters!--she certainly lost caste by her
resolute unconventionalism, did my friend Miss Lawrence. But then, as
she said to me, "What in life does it matter about losing caste with
people who have no caste to lose?" She writes to me continually, and
her house is my home in London. I have never been able to make her
confess that she sent me my violin; but I know she did, for her
interest in me can only be explained on that ground, and there is that
look upon her face, whenever I play, which assures me of something
associated in her mind and memory with my playing that is not itself
music.

Miss Lawrence also corresponds with Clara, and Clara sees us too; but
no one, seeing her, would believe her to be childless and alone. She
is more beautiful than ever, and not less calm,--more loving and more
beloved.

We had Florimond Anastase a concert-player at our very last festival.
He was exactly like the young Anastase who taught me, and I should not
have been able to believe him older but for his companion, a young
lady, who sat below him in the audience, and at whom I could only
gaze. It was Josephine Cerinthia, no longer a child, but still a
prodigy, for she has the finest voice, it is said, in Europe. No one
will hear it, however, for Anastase, who adopted her eight years ago,
makes her life the life of a princess, or as very few princesses' can
be; he works for her, he saves for her, and has already made her rich.
They say he will marry her by and by; it may be so, but I do not
myself believe it.

Near the house in which Seraphael died, and rising as from the ashes
of his tomb, is another house which holds his name, and will ever hold
it to be immortal. Sons and daughters of his own are there,--of his
land, his race, his genius,--those whom music has "called" and
"chosen" from the children of humanity. The grandeur of the
institution, its stupendous scale, its intention, its consummation,
afford, to the imagination that enshrines him, the only monument that
would not insult his name. Nor is that temple without its priestess,
that altar without its angel. She who devoted the wealth of his wisdom
to that work gave up the treasure of her life besides, and has
consecrated herself to its superintendence. At the monumental school
she would be adored, but that she is too much loved as children
love,--too much at home there to be feared. I hold her as my passion
forever; she makes my old years young in memory, and to every new
morning of my life her name is Music. With another name--not dearer,
but as dear--she is indissolubly connected; and if I preserve my
heart's first purity, it is to them I owe it.

I write no more. Had I desired to treat of music specifically, I
should not have written at all; for that theme demands a tongue beyond
the tongues of men and angels,--a voice that is no more heard. But if
one faithful spirit find an echo in my expression, to his beating
heart for music, his inward song of praise, it is not in vain that I
write, that what I have written is written.

      CHARLES AUCHESTER.

FOOTNOTE:

[10] Sterndale Bennett married Mary Anne, daughter of Captain James
Wood, R. N.


THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Charles Auchester, Volume 2 (of 2), by 
Elizabeth Sheppard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES AUCHESTER, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***

***** This file should be named 40259-8.txt or 40259-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/5/40259/

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


