Project Gutenberg's Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 1., by Samuel Warren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 1.

Author: Samuel Warren

Release Date: January 17, 2010 [EBook #31004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. VOLUME 1. ***




Produced by David Cortesi, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






       *       *       *       *       *

            TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.

     [Illustration: Portrait of the author.]

            TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.

                     BY

            SAMUEL WARREN, F.R.S.

                   VOL. I.

                   BOSTON:
          LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.
                    1900.

             University Press:
       John Wilson and Son, Cambridge.

       *       *       *       *       *

                  To Emily,

  A LITTLE BLUE-EYED LAUGHING IMAGE OF PURITY
                 AND HAPPINESS,

          _THESE VOLUMES ARE INSCRIBED_

  AS A SLIGHT MEMORIAL OF A FATHER'S AFFECTION
             FOR AN ONLY DAUGHTER.

  _October_, 1841.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

The author provided thirty-three notes to the text. They are indicated
by numbers in square brackets, as[12]. The notes themselves are at the
end of the document. To find note number 12, search for "Note 12".

In this Unicode edition, the oe-ligature (œ, unicode #339) is used
at many points, and tow phrases in Greek characters appear in the Notes.
All other text is ASCII (ISO-8859-1).

Four typographical errors were corrected in transcription: Gamman for
Gammon, p. 169; possisible for possible, p. 195; familarly for
familiarly, p. 250; and possesssion for possession, p. 402.




PUBLISHERS' PREFACE.


The fact that a well-printed edition of this notable story has not been
in print either in England or America since its original publication in
1841 is a sufficient reason for the present edition.

It includes the valuable notes in which the author elucidated the "many
legal topics contained in the work, enabling the non-professional reader
to understand more easily the somewhat complex and elaborate _plot_ of
the story."

Of the story itself it is hardly necessary to speak. Always deservedly
popular, it has been widely read for nearly fifty years in England and
America, has been translated into French and German, and has only
required to be presented in a pleasing form, with readable type and good
paper, to insure it the circulation which it deserves.

Boston, 1889.




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


The Author of this Work begs gratefully to express his conviction that
no small share of any success which it may have met with, is
attributable to the circumstance of its having had the advantage of an
introduction to the public through the medium of _Blackwood's
Magazine_--a distinguished periodical, to which he feels it an honor to
have been, for a time, a contributor.

One word, only, he ventures to offer, with reference to the general
character and tendency of "TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR." He has occasionally
observed it spoken of as "an amusing and laughable" story; but he cannot
help thinking that no one will so characterize it, who may take the
trouble of reading it throughout, and be capable of comprehending its
scope and object. Whatever may be its defects of execution, it has been
written in a grave and earnest spirit; with no attempt whatever to
render it acceptable to _mere_ novel-readers; but with a steadfast view
to that development and illustration, whether humorously or otherwise,
of principles, of character, and of conduct, which the author had
proposed to himself from the first, in the hope that he might secure
the approbation of persons of sober, independent, and experienced
judgment.

Literature is not the author's profession. Having been led, by special
circumstances only, to commence writing this work, he found it
impossible to go on, without sacrificing to it a large portion of the
time usually allotted to repose, at some little cost both of health and
spirits. This was, however, indispensable, in order to prevent its
interference with his professional avocations. It has been written,
also, under certain other considerable disadvantages--which may account
for several imperfections in it during its original appearance. The
periodical interval of leisure which his profession allows him, has
enabled the author, however, to give that revision to the whole, which
may render it worthier of the public favor. He is greatly gratified by
the reception which it has already met with, both at home and abroad;
and in taking a final and a reluctant leave of the public, ventures to
express a hope, that this work may prove to be an addition, however
small and humble, to the stock of healthy English literature.

LONDON, _October_ 1841.

     For the beautiful verses entitled "PEACE," (at page 266, Vol. I.)
     the author is indebted to a friend--(W. S.)




CONTENTS TO VOL. I.


 CHAP.                                                               PAGE

    I.  While Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse adorns his outer man, the
        reader gets a glimpse of his inner man, such as it is.--A
        sincere friend; a wonderful advertisement; an important
        epistle.--A snake approaches an ape; which signifies Mr.
        Gammon's introduction to Titmouse                               1

   II.  Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, and Mr. Titmouse; who astonishes
        them with a taste of his quality.--Huckaback chooses to call
        upon Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, to stir them up; and what it
        led to                                                         47

  III.  Great lawyers come on the scene; a glimpse of daylight; a
        very moving letter.--Titmouse and Huckaback think it right
        to go to church; and the former receives a lesson on
        landlord-and-tenant law, from Mrs. Squallop                    94

   IV.  A vision of beauty unseen by Mr. Titmouse; who is in the
        midnight of despair and writes a letter which startles Mr.
        Quirk.--How Gammon used to wind round Quirk; and the subtle
        means he took to find out what Titmouse was about             137

    V.  Gammon tackling Tag-rag.--Satin Lodge, and its refined
        inmates, who all pay their duty to Titmouse; and he very
        nearly falls in love with Miss Tag-rag.
        Cyanochaitanthropopoion                                       181

   VI.  Damascus Cream; Tetaragmenon Abracadabra; Titmouse's levee
        at Closet Court; Mr. Tag-rag's entertainment to him at Satin
        Lodge; and its disgusting issue                               222

  VII.  The reader is now introduced to quite a different set of
        people, in Grosvenor Street, and falls in love with Kate
        Aubrey.--Christmas in the country; Yatton; Madam Aubrey; the
        Reverend Dr. Tatham; and old Blind Bess                       252

 VIII.  Two strange creatures are seen at Yatton by Mr. Aubrey and
        his sister; and a hand-grenade is thrown, unseen, at the
        feet of the latter.--Country life; Yatton; Fotheringham; the
        two beauties; and an angel beset by an imp                    297

   IX.  The explosion of the hand-grenade; shattered hopes and
        happiness.--A winter evening's gossip at the Aubrey Arms,
        among Yatton villagers, and its grievous interruption         332

    X.  Gammon _versus_ Tag-rag; and Snap _cum_ Titmouse,
        introducing him to life in London--of one sort.--The feast
        of reason and the flow of soul at Alibi House; Mr. Quirk's
        banquet to Titmouse, who is overcome by it.--Titmouse seems
        to hesitate between Miss Quirk and Kate Aubrey                372

   XI.  Suffering; dignity; tenderness; resignation                   415

  XII.  How the great flaw was discovered in Mr. Aubrey's title; but
        a terrible hitch occurs in the proceedings of his opponents   431

 XIII.  Madam Aubrey's death and burial; Gammon smitten with the
        sight of Kate Aubrey's beauty; and a great battle takes
        place at the York assizes for Yatton                          454

        Notes                                                         507




CHAPTER I.


About ten o'clock one Sunday morning, in the month of July 18--, the
dazzling sunbeams, which had for several hours irradiated a little
dismal back attic in one of the closest courts adjoining Oxford Street,
in London, and stimulated with their intensity the closed eyelids of a
young man--one TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE--lying in bed, at length awoke him. He
rubbed his eyes for some time, to relieve himself from the irritation
occasioned by the sudden glare they encountered; and yawned and
stretched his limbs with a heavy sense of weariness, as though his sleep
had not refreshed him. He presently cast his eyes towards the heap of
clothes lying huddled together on the backless chair by the bedside,
where he had hastily flung them about an hour after midnight; at which
time he had returned from a great draper's shop in Oxford Street, where
he served as a shopman, and where he had nearly dropped asleep, after a
long day's work, in the act of putting up the shutters. He could hardly
keep his eyes open while he undressed, short as was the time required to
do so; and on dropping exhausted into bed, there he had continued, in
deep unbroken slumber, till the moment of his being presented to the
reader.--He lay for several minutes, stretching, yawning, and sighing,
occasionally casting an irresolute glance towards the tiny fireplace,
where lay a modicum of wood and coal, with a tinder-box and a match or
two placed upon the hob, so that he could easily light his fire for the
purposes of shaving, and breakfasting. He stepped at length lazily out
of bed, and when he felt his feet, again yawned and stretched himself.
Then he lit his fire, placed his bit of a kettle on the top of it, and
returned to bed, where he lay with his eye fixed on the fire, watching
the crackling blaze insinuate itself through the wood and coal. Once,
however, it began to fail, so he had to get up and assist it, by
blowing, and bits of paper; and it seemed in so precarious a state that
he determined not again to lie down, but sit on the bedside: as he did,
with his arms folded, ready to resume operations if necessary. In this
posture he remained for some time, watching his little fire, and
listlessly listening to the discordant jangling of innumerable
church-bells, clamorously calling the citizens to their devotions. The
current of thoughts passing through his mind, was something like the
following:--

"Heigho!--Lud, Lud!--Dull as ditch water!--This is my only holiday, yet
I don't seem to enjoy it!--for I feel knocked up with my week's work! (A
yawn.) What a life mine is, to be sure! Here am I, in my
eight-and-twentieth year, and for four long years have been one of the
shopmen at Tag-rag & Co.'s, slaving from half-past seven o'clock in the
morning till nine at night, and all for a salary of thirty-five pounds
a-year, and my board! And Mr. Tag-rag--eugh! what a beast!--is always
telling me how high he's raised my salary!! Thirty-five pounds a-year is
all I have for lodging, and turning out like a gentleman! 'Pon my soul!
it _can't_ last; for sometimes I feel getting desperate--such strange
thoughts come into my mind!--Seven shillings a-week do I pay for _this_
cursed hole--(he uttered these words with a bitter emphasis, accompanied
by a disgustful look round the little room)--that one couldn't swing a
cat in without touching the four sides!--Last winter three of our gents
(_i. e._ his fellow-shopmen) came to tea with me one Sunday night; and
bitter cold as it was, we four made this cussed dog-hole so hot, we were
obliged to open the window!--And as for accommodation--I recollect I had
to borrow two nasty chairs from the people below, who on the next Sunday
borrowed my only decanter, in return, and, hang them, cracked it!--Curse
me, say I, if this life is worth having! It's all the very vanity of
vanities--as it's said somewhere in the Bible--and no mistake! Fag, fag,
fag, all one's days, and--what for? Thirty-five pounds a-year, and '_no
advance!_' (Here occurred a pause and revery, from which he was roused
by the clangor of the church-bells.) Bah, bells! ring away till you're
all cracked!--Now do you think _I'm_ going to be mewed up in church on
this the only day out of the seven I've got to sweeten myself in, and
sniff fresh air? A precious joke that would be! (A yawn.) Whew!--after
all, I'd almost as lieve sit here; for what's the use of my going out?
Everybody I see out is happy, excepting me, and the poor chaps that are
like me!--Everybody laughs when they see me, and know that I'm only a
tallow-faced counter-jumper--I know that's the odious name we gents go
by!--for whom it's no use to go out--for one day in seven can't give one
a bloom! Oh, Lord! what's the use of being good-looking, as _some_ chaps
say I am?"--Here he instinctively passed his left hand through a
profusion of sandy-colored hair, and cast an eye towards the bit of
fractured looking-glass which hung against the wall, and had, by
faithfully representing to him a by no means ugly set of features
(despite the dismal hue of his hair) whenever he chose to appeal to it,
afforded him more enjoyment than any other object in the world, for
years. "Ah, by Jove! many and many's the fine gal I've done my best to
attract the notice of, while I was serving her in the shop--that is,
when I've seen her get out of a carriage! There has been luck to many a
chap like me, in the same line of speculation: look at Tom Tarnish--how
did he get Miss Twang, the rich pianoforte-maker's daughter?--and _now_
he's cut the shop, and lives at Hackney, like a regular gentleman! Ah!
that _was_ a stroke! But somehow it hasn't answered with _me_ yet; the
gals don't take! How I have set my eyes to be sure, and ogled
them!--_All_ of them don't seem to dislike the thing--and sometimes
they'll smile, in a sort of way that says I'm safe--but it's been no use
yet, not a bit of it!--My eyes! catch me, by the way, ever nodding again
to a lady on the Sunday, that had smiled when I stared at her while
serving her in the shop--after what happened to me a month or two ago in
the Park! Didn't I feel like damaged goods, just then? But it's no
matter, women are so different at different times!--Very likely I
mismanaged the thing. By the way, what a precious puppy of a chap the
fellow was that came up to her at the time she stepped out of her
carriage to walk a bit! As for good looks--cut me to ribbons (another
glance at the glass) no; I a'n't afraid _there_,
neither--but--heigho!--I suppose he was, as they say, born with a golden
spoon in his mouth, and had never so many a thousand a-year, to make up
to him for never so few brains! He was uncommon well-dressed, though, I
must own. What trousers!--they stuck so natural to him, he might have
been born in them. And his waistcoat, and satin stock--what an air! And
yet, his figure was nothing _very_ out of the way! His gloves, as white
as snow; I've no doubt he wears a pair of them a-day--my stars! that's
three-and-sixpence a-day; for don't I know what _they_ cost?--Whew! if I
had but the cash to carry on that sort of thing!--And when he'd seen
her into her carriage--the horse he got on!--and what a tip-top
groom--that chap's wages, I'll answer for it, were equal to my salary!
(Here was another pause.) Now, just for the fun of the thing, only
suppose luck was to befall _me_! Say that somebody was to leave me lots
of cash--many thousands a-year, or something in that line! My stars!
wouldn't I go it with the best of them! (Another long pause.) Gad, I
really should hardly know how to begin to spend it!--I think, by the
way, I'd buy a _title_ to set off with--for what won't money buy? The
thing's often done; there was a great pawn-broker in the city, the other
day, made a baronet of, all for his money--and why shouldn't I?" He grew
a little heated with the progress of his reflections, clasping his hands
with involuntary energy, as he stretched them out to their fullest
extent, to give effect to a very hearty yawn. "Lord, only think how it
would sound!--

     "SIR TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, BARONET;" or, "LORD TITMOUSE!!"

"The very first place I'd go to, after I'd got my title, and was rigged
out in Tight-fit's tip-top, should be--our cursed shop! to buy a dozen
or two pair of white kid. Ah, ha! What a flutter there would be among
the poor pale devils as were standing, just as ever, behind the
counters, at Tag-rag and Co.'s when my carriage drew up, and I stepped,
a tip-top swell, into the shop. Tag-rag would come and attend to me
himself! No, he wouldn't--pride wouldn't let him. I don't know, though:
what wouldn't he do to turn a penny, and make two and nine-pence into
three and a penny? I shouldn't _quite_ come Captain Stiff over him, I
think, just at first; but I should treat him with a kind of an air, too,
as if--hem! 'Pon my life! how delightful! (A sigh and a pause.) Yes, I
should often come to the shop. Gad, it would be half the fun of my
fortune! How they would envy me, to be sure! How one should enjoy it! I
wouldn't think of _marrying_ till--and yet I won't say either; if I got
among some of them out-and-outers--those first-rate articles--that lady,
for instance, the other day in the Park--I should like to see her cut me
as she did, with ten thousand a-year in my pocket! Why, she'd be running
after _me_!--or there's no truth in novels, which I'm sure there's often
a great deal in. Oh, of course, I might marry whom I pleased! Who
couldn't be got with ten thousand a-year? (Another pause.) I think I
should go abroad to Russia directly; for they tell me there's a man
lives there who could dye this cussed hair of mine any color I
liked--and--egad! I'd come home as black as a crow, and hold up my head
as high as any of them! While I was about it, I'd have a touch at my
eyebrows"---- Crash here went all his castle-building, at the sound of
his tea-kettle, hissing, whizzing, sputtering, in the agonies of boiling
over; as if the intolerable heat of the fire had driven desperate the
poor creature placed upon it, which instinctively tried thus to
extinguish the cause of its anguish. Having taken it off, and placed it
upon the hob, and put on the fire a tiny fragment of fresh coal, he
began to make preparations for shaving, by pouring some of the hot water
into an old tea-cup, which was presently to serve for the purposes of
breakfast. Then he spread out a bit of crumpled whity-brown paper, in
which had been folded up a couple of cigars, bought over-night for the
Sunday's special enjoyment--and as to which, if he supposed they had
come from any place beyond the four seas, I imagine him to have been
slightly mistaken. He placed this bit of paper on the little
mantel-piece; drew his solitary well-worn razor several times across the
palm of his left hand; dipped his brush, worn, within half an inch, to
the stump, into the hot water; presently passed it over so much of his
face as he intended to shave; then rubbed on the damp surface a bit of
yellow soap--and in less than five minutes Mr. Titmouse was a shaved
man. But mark--don't suppose that he had performed an extensive
operation. One would have thought him anxious to get rid of as much as
possible of his abominable sandy-colored hair. Quite the contrary! Every
hair of his spreading whiskers was sacred from the touch of steel; and a
bushy crop of hair stretched underneath his chin, coming curled out on
each side of it, above his stock, like two little horns or tusks. An
imperial--_i. e._ a dirt-colored tuft of hair, permitted to grow
perpendicularly down the under-lip of puppies--and a pair of promising
mustaches, poor Mr. Titmouse had been compelled to sacrifice some time
before, to the tyrannical whimsies of his vulgar employer, Mr. Tag-rag,
who imagined them not to be exactly suitable appendages for
counter-jumpers. Thus will it be seen that the space shaved over on this
occasion was somewhat circumscribed. This operation over, he took out of
his trunk an old dirty-looking pomatum pot. A modicum of its contents,
extracted on the tips of his two forefingers, he stroked carefully into
his eyebrows; then spreading some on the palms of his hands, he rubbed
it vigorously into his stubborn hair and whiskers for some quarter of an
hour; afterwards combing and brushing his hair into half a dozen
different dispositions--so fastidious in that matter was Mr. Titmouse.
Then he dipped the end of a towel into a little water, and twisting it
round his right forefinger, passed it gently over his face, carefully
avoiding his eyebrows, and the hair at the top, sides, and bottom of his
face, which he then wiped with a dry corner of the towel; and no farther
did Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse think it necessary to carry his ablutions.
Had he, however, been able to "see himself as others saw him," in
respect of those neglected regions which lay somewhere behind and
beneath his ears, he might not, possibly, have thought it superfluous to
irrigate them with a little soap and water; but, after all, he knew
best; it might have given him cold: and besides, his hair was very thick
and long behind, and might perhaps conceal anything that was unsightly.
Then Mr. Titmouse drew from underneath the bed a bottle of "incomparable
blacking," and a couple of brushes; with great labor and skill polishing
his boots up to a wonderful degree of brilliancy. Having replaced his
blacking implements under the bed and washed his hands, he devoted a few
moments to boiling about three tea-spoonfuls of coffee, (as it was
styled on the paper from which he took, and in which he had bought,
it--whereas it was, in fact, _chiccory_.) Then he drew forth from his
trunk a calico shirt, with linen wristbands and collar, which had been
worn only twice--_i. e._ on the preceding two Sundays--since its last
washing--and put it on, taking great care not to rumple a very showy
front, containing three rows of frills; in the middle one of which he
stuck three "studs," connected together with two little gilt chains,
looking exceedingly stylish--especially when coupled with a span-new
satin stock, which he next buckled round his neck. Having put on his
bright boots, (without, I am really sorry to say, any stockings,) he
carefully insinuated his legs into a pair of white trousers, for the
first time since their last washing; and what with his short straps and
high braces, they were so tight that you would have feared their
bursting if he should have sat down hastily. I am almost afraid that I
shall hardly be believed; but it is a fact, that the next thing he did
was to attach a pair of spurs to his boots:--but, to be sure, it was not
_impossible_ that he might intend to ride during the day. Then he put on
a queer kind of under-waistcoat, which in fact was only a roll-collar of
rather faded pea-green silk, and designed to set off a very fine
flowered damson-colored silk waistcoat; over which he drew a massive
mosaic-gold chain, (to purchase which he had sold a serviceable silver
watch,) which had been carefully wrapped up in cotton wool; from which
soft depository, also, he drew HIS RING, (those must have been sharp
eyes which could tell, at a distance, and in a hurry, that it was not
diamond,) which he placed on the stumpy little finger of his red and
thick right hand--and contemplated its sparkle with exquisite
satisfaction. Having proceeded thus far with his toilet, he sat down to
his breakfast, spreading upon his lap the shirt which he had taken off,
to preserve his white trousers from spot or stain--his thoughts
alternating between his late waking vision and his purposes for the day.
He had no butter, having used the last on the preceding morning; so he
was fain to put up with dry bread--and very dry and teeth-trying it was,
poor fellow--but his eye lit on his ring! Having swallowed two cups of
his _quasi_-coffee, (eugh! such stuff!) he resumed his toilet, by
drawing out of his other trunk his blue surtout, with embossed silk
buttons and velvet collar, and an outside pocket in the left breast.
Having smoothed down a few creases, he put it on:--then, before his
little vulgar fraction of a looking-glass, he stood twitching about the
collar, and sleeves, and front, so as to make them sit well; concluding
with a careful elongation of the wristbands of his shirt, so as to show
their whiteness gracefully beyond the cuff of his coat-sleeve--and he
succeeded in producing a sort of white boundary line between the blue of
his coat-sleeve and the red of his hand. At that useful member he could
not help looking with a sigh, as he had often done before--for it was
not a handsome hand. It was broad and red, and the fingers were thick
and stumpy, with very coarse deep wrinkles at every joint. His nails
also were flat and shapeless; and he used to be continually gnawing
them till he had succeeded in getting them down to the quick--and they
were a sight to set one's teeth on edge. Then he extracted from the
first-mentioned trunk a white pocket handkerchief--an exemplary one,
that had gone through four Sundays' show, (not _use_, be it understood,)
and yet was capable of exhibition again. A pair of sky-colored kid
gloves next made their appearance: which, however, showed such barefaced
marks of former service as rendered indispensable a ten minutes' rubbing
with bread-crumbs. His Sunday hat, carefully covered with silver-paper,
was next gently removed from its well-worn box--ah, how lightly and
delicately did he pass his smoothing hand round its glossy surface!
Lastly, he took down a thin black cane, with a gilt head, and full brown
tassel, from a peg behind the door--and his toilet was complete. Laying
down his cane for a moment, he passed his hands again through his hair,
arranging it so as to fall nicely on each side beneath his hat, which he
then placed upon his head, with an elegant inclination towards the left
side. He was really not bad-looking, in spite of his sandy-colored hair.
His forehead, to be sure, was contracted, and his eyes were of a very
light color, and a trifle too protuberant; but his mouth was rather
well-formed, and being seldom closed, exhibited very beautiful teeth;
and his nose was of that description which generally passes for a Roman
nose. His countenance wore generally a smile, and was expressive
of--self-satisfaction: and surely any expression is better than none at
all. As for there being the slightest trace of _intellect_ in it, I
should be misleading the reader if I were to say anything of the sort.
In height, he was about five feet and a quarter of an inch, _in his
boots_, and he was rather strongly set, with a little tendency to round
shoulders:--but his limbs were pliant, and his motions nimble.

Here you have, then, Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse to the life--certainly no
more than an average sample of his kind; but as he is to go through a
considerable variety of situation and circumstance, I thought you would
like to have him as distinctly before your mind's eye as it was in my
power to present him.--Well--he put his hat on, as I have said; buttoned
the lowest two buttons of his surtout, and stuck his white pocket
handkerchief into the outside pocket in front, as already mentioned,
anxiously disposing it so as to let a little appear above the edge of
the pocket, with a sort of careful carelessness--a graceful contrast to
the blue; drew on his gloves; took his cane in his hand; drained the
last sad remnant of infusion of chiccory in his coffee-cup; and, the sun
shining in the full splendor of a July noon, and promising a glorious
day, forth sallied this poor fellow, an Oxford Street Adonis, going
forth conquering and to conquer! Petty finery without, a pinched and
stinted stomach within; a case of Back _versus_ Belly, (as the lawyers
would have it,) the plaintiff winning in a canter! Forth sallied, I say,
Mr. Titmouse, as also, doubtless, sallied forth that day some five or
six thousand similar personages, down the narrow, creaking, close
staircase, which he had no sooner quitted than he heard exclaimed from
an opposite window, "My eyes! _a'n't_ that a swell!" He felt how true
the observation was, and that at that moment he was somewhat out of his
element; so he hurried on, and soon reached that great broad
disheartening street, apostrophized by the celebrated Opium-Eater,[1]
with bitter feeling, as--"Oxford Street!--stony-hearted stepmother! Thou
that listenest to the sighs of orphans, and drinkest the tears of
children!" Here, though his spirits were not just then very buoyant, our
poor little dandy breathed more freely than when he was passing through
the wretched crowded court (Closet Court) which he had just quitted. He
passed and met hundreds who, like himself, seemed released for a
precious day's interval from miserable confinement and slavery during
the week; but there were not very many of them who could vie with him in
elegance of appearance--and that was indeed a luxurious reflection! Who
could do justice to the air with which he strutted along! He felt as
happy, poor soul, in his little ostentation, as his Corinthian rival in
tip-top turn-out, after twice as long, and as anxious, and fifty times
as expensive, preparations for effective public display! Nay, _my_ poor
swell was in some respects greatly the superior of such an one as I have
alluded to. Mr. Titmouse _did_, to a great degree, bedizen his back--but
at the expense of his belly; whereas, the Corinthian exquisite, too
often taking advantage of station and influence, recklessly both pampers
his luxurious appetite within, and decorates his person without, at the
expense of innumerable heart-aching creditors. I do not mean, however,
to claim any real merit for Mr. Titmouse on this score, because I am not
sure how he would act if he were to become possessed of his magnificent
rival's means and opportunities for the perpetration of gentlemanly
frauds on a splendid scale.--But we shall perhaps see by and by.

Mr. Titmouse walked along with leisurely step; for haste and
perspiration were vulgar, and he had the day before him. Observe, now,
the careless glance of self-satisfaction with which he occasionally
regards his bright boots, with their martial appendage, giving out a
faint clinking sound as he heavily treads the broad flags; his spotless
trousers, his tight surtout, and the tip of white handkerchief peeping
_accidentally_ out in front! A pleasant sight it was to behold him in a
chance rencontre with some one genteel enough to be recognized--as he
stood, resting on his left leg; his left arm stuck upon his hip; his
right leg easily bent outwards; his right hand lightly holding his ebon
cane, with the gilt head of which he occasionally tapped his teeth; and
his eyes, half closed, scrutinizing the face and figure of each "_pretty
gal_" as she passed, and to whom he had a delicious consciousness that
he appeared an object of interest! This was indeed HAPPINESS, as far as
his forlorn condition could admit of his enjoying happiness.--He had no
particular object in view. A tiff over-night with two of his shopmates,
had broken off a party which they had agreed the Sunday preceding in
forming, to go that day to Greenwich; and this trifling circumstance had
a little soured his temper, depressed as had been his spirits before. He
resolved, on consideration, to walk straight on, and dine somewhere a
little way out of town, by way of passing the time till four o'clock, at
which hour he intended to make his appearance in Hyde Park, "to see the
swells and the fashions," which was his favorite Sunday occupation.

His condition was, indeed, forlorn in the extreme. To say nothing of his
_prospects_ in life--what was his present condition? A shopman with
thirty-five pounds a-year, out of which he had to find his clothing,
washing, lodging, and all other incidental expenses--the chief item of
his board--such as it was--being found him by his employers! He was five
weeks in arrear to his landlady--a corpulent old termagant, whom nothing
could have induced him to risk offending, but his overmastering love of
finery; for I grieve to say, that this deficiency had been occasioned by
his purchase of the ring he then wore with so much pride! How he had
contrived to pacify her--lie upon lie he must have had recourse to--I
know not. He was indebted also to his poor washerwoman in five or six
shillings for at least a quarter's washing; and owed five times that
amount to a little old tailor, who, with huge spectacles on his nose,
turned up to him, out of a little cupboard which he occupied in Closet
Court, and which Titmouse had to pass whenever he went to or from his
lodgings, a lean, sallow, wrinkled face, imploring him to "settle his
small account." All the cash in hand which he had to meet contingencies
between that day and quarter-day, which was six weeks off, was about
twenty-six shillings, of which he had taken one for the present day's
expenses!

Revolving these somewhat disheartening matters in his mind, he passed
easily and leisurely along the whole length of Oxford Street. No one
could have judged from his dressy appearance, the constant smirk on his
face, and his confident air, how very miserable that poor little dandy
was; but three-fourths of his misery were really occasioned by the
impossibility he felt of his ever being able to indulge in his
propensities for finery and display. Nothing better had he to occupy his
few thoughts. He had had only a plain mercantile education, as it is
called, _i. e._ reading, writing, and arithmetic; beyond an exceedingly
moderate acquaintance with these, he knew nothing whatever; not having
read anything except a few inferior novels, and plays, and sporting
newspapers. Deplorable, however, as were his circumstances--

    "Hope springs eternal in the human breast."

And probably, in common with most who are miserable from straitened
circumstances, he often conceived, and secretly relied upon, the
possibility of some unexpected and accidental change for the better. He
had heard and read of extraordinary cases of LUCK. Why might he not be
one of the LUCKY? A rich girl might fall in love with him--that was,
poor fellow! in his consideration, one of the least unlikely ways of
luck's advent; or some one might leave him money; or he might win a
prize in the lottery;--all these, and other accidental modes of getting
rich, frequently occurred to the well-regulated mind of Mr. Tittlebat
Titmouse; but he never once thought of one thing, viz. of determined,
unwearying industry, perseverance, and integrity in the way of his
business, conducing to such a result!

Is his case a solitary one?--Dear reader, _you_ may be unlike poor
Tittlebat Titmouse in every respect except _one_!

On he walked towards Bayswater; and finding that it was yet early, and
considering that the farther he went from town the better prospect there
would be of his being able, with little sacrifice of appearances, to get
a dinner consistent with the means he carried about with him, viz. one
shilling, he pursued his way a mile or two beyond Bayswater; and, sure
enough, came at length upon a nice little public-house on the roadside,
called the Square-toes Arms. Very tired, and very dusty, he first sat
down in a small back room to rest himself; and took the opportunity to
call for a clothes-brush and shoe-brush, to relieve his clothes and
boots from the heavy dust upon them. Having thus attended to his outer
man, as far as circumstances would permit, he bethought himself of his
inner man, whose cravings he presently satisfied with a pretty
substantial mutton-pie and a pint of porter. This fare, together with a
penny (which he felt _forced_ to give) to the little girl who waited on
him, cost him tenpence; and then, having somewhat refreshed himself, he
began to think of returning to town. Having lit one of his two cigars,
he sallied forth, puffing along with an air of quiet enjoyment. Dinner,
however humble, seldom fails, especially when accompanied by a fair
draught of tolerable porter, in some considerable degree to tranquillize
the animal spirits; and that soothing effect began soon to be
experienced by Mr. Titmouse. The sedative _cause_ he erroneously
considered to be the cigar he was smoking; whereas in fact the only
tobacco he had imbibed was from the porter. But, however that might be,
he certainly returned towards town in a calmer and more cheerful humor
than that in which he had quitted it an hour or two before.

As he approached Cumberland Gate, it was about half-past five; and the
Park might be said to be at its _acme_ of fashion, as far as that could
be indicated by a sluggish stream of carriages, three and four
abreast--coroneted panels in abundance--noble and well-known equestrians
of both sexes, in troops--and some hundreds of pedestrians of the same
description. So continuous was the throng of carriages and horsemen,
that Titmouse did not find it the easiest matter in the world to dart
across to the footpath in the inner circle. That, however, he presently
safely accomplished, encountering no more serious mischance than the
muttered "D--n your eyes!" of a haughty groom, between whom and his
master Mr. Titmouse had presumed to intervene. What a crowd of elegant
women, many of them young and beautiful, (who but such, to be sure,
would have become, or been allowed to become, pedestrians in the Park?)
he encountered, as he slowly sauntered on, all of them obsequiously
attended by brilliant beaux! Lords and ladies were here manifestly as
plentiful as plebeians in Oxford Street. What an enchanted ground!--How
delicious this soft crush and flutter of aristocracy! Poor Titmouse felt
at once an intense pleasure, and a withering consciousness of his utter
insignificance. Many a sigh of dissatisfaction and envy escaped him; yet
he stepped along with a tolerably assured air, looking everybody he met
straight in the face, and occasionally twirling about his little cane
with an air which seemed to say--"Whatever opinion _you_ may form of me,
I have a very good opinion of myself." Indeed, was he not as much a
man--an Englishman--as the best of them? What was the real difference
between Count Do-'em-all and Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse? Only that the Count
had dark hair and whiskers, and owed more money than Mr. Titmouse's
creditors could be persuaded to allow _him_ to owe! Would to
Heaven--thought Titmouse--that any _one_ tailor would patronize _him_ as
half a dozen had patronized the Count! If pretty ladies of quality did
not disdain a walking advertisement of a few first-rate tailors, like
the Count, why should they turn up their noses at an assistant in an
extensive wholesale and retail establishment in Oxford Street,
conversant with the qualities and prices of the most beautiful articles
of female attire? Yet alas, they _did_ so!---- He sighed heavily.
Leaning against the railing in a studied attitude, and eying wistfully
each gay and fashionable equipage, with its often lovely, and sometimes
haughty enclosure, as it rolled slowly past him, Mr. Titmouse became
more and more convinced of a great practical truth, viz. that the only
real distinction between mankind was that effected by money. Want of
money alone had placed him in his present abject position. Abject
indeed! By the great folk, who were passing him on all sides, he felt,
well-dressed as he believed himself to be, that he was no more noticed
than as if he had been an ant, a blue-bottle fly, or a black beetle! He
looked, and sighed--sighed, and looked--looked, and sighed again, in a
kind of agony of vain longing. While his only day in the week for
breathing fresh air, and appearing like a gentleman in the world, was
rapidly drawing to a close, and he was beginning to think of returning
to the dog-hole he had crawled out of in the morning, and to the shop
for the rest of the week; the great, and gay, and happy folk he was
looking at, were thinking of driving home to dress for their grand
dinners, and to lay out every kind of fine amusement for the ensuing
week: and that, moreover, was the sort of life they led every day in
the week! He heaved a profound sigh. At that moment a superb cab, with a
gentleman in it dressed in great elegance, and with very keen dark eyes,
and striking nose and whiskers, came up with a cab of still more
exquisite structure and appointments, and at which Titmouse gazed with
unutterable feelings of envy--in which sat a young man, evidently of
consequence; very handsome, with splendid mustaches; perfectly
well-dressed; holding the reins and whip gracefully in hands glistening
in straw-colored kid gloves--and between the two gentlemen ensued the
following low-toned colloquy, which it were to be wished that every such
sighing simpleton (as Titmouse must, I fear, by this time appear to the
reader) could have overheard.

"Ah, Fitz!" said the former-mentioned gentleman to the latter, who
suddenly reddened when he perceived who had addressed him. The manner of
the speaker was execrably familiar and presumptuous--but how could the
embarrassed _swell_ help himself?--"When did you return to town?"

"Last night only"----

"Enjoyed yourself, I hope?"

"Pretty well--but--I--suppose you"----

"Sorry for it," interrupted the first speaker in a lower tone,
perceiving the vexation of his companion; "but can't help it, you know."

"When?"

"To-morrow at nine. Monstrous sorry for it--'pon my soul, you really
must look sharp, Fitz, or the thing won't go on much longer."

"Must it be, really?" inquired the other, biting his lips--at that
moment kissing his hand to a very beautiful girl, who slowly passed him
in a coroneted chariot--"must it really be, Joe?" he repeated, turning
towards his companion a pale and bitterly chagrined countenance.

"Poz, 'pon my life. Cage clean, however, and not very full--just at
present"----

"Would not _Wednesday_!"--inquired the other, leaning forward towards
the former speaker's cab, and whispering with an air of intense
earnestness. "The fact is, I've engagements at C----'s on Monday and
Tuesday nights with one or two country cousins, and I _may_ be in a
condition--eh? you understand?"

His companion shook his head distrustfully.

"Upon my word and honor as a gentleman, it's the fact!" said the other,
in a low vehement tone.

"Then--say Wednesday, nine o'clock, A. M. You understand? No mistake,
Fitz!" replied his companion, looking him steadily in the face as he
spoke.

"None--honor!"--After a pause--"Who is it?"

His companion took a slip of paper out of his pocket, and in a whisper
read from it--"Cab, harness, &c., £297, 10s."

"A villain! It's been of only three years' standing," interrupted the
other, in an indignant mutter.

"Between ourselves, he _is_ rather a sharp hand. Then, I'm sorry to say
there's a Detainer or two I have had a hint of"----

The swell uttered an execration which I dare not convey to paper--his
face distorted with an expression of mingled disgust, vexation, and
hatred; and adding, "Wednesday--nine"--drove off, a picture of tranquil
enjoyment.

I need hardly say that _he_ was a fashionable young spendthrift, and the
other a sheriff's officer of the first water--the genteelest _beak_ that
ever was known or heard of--who had been on the look-out for him several
days, and with whom the happy youngster was doomed to spend some
considerable time at a cheerful residence in Chancery Lane, bleeding
gold at every pore the while:--his only chance of avoiding which, was,
as he had truly hinted, an honorable attempt on the purses of two
hospitable country cousins, in the meanwhile, at C----'s! And if he did
not succeed in that enterprise, so that he _must_ go to cage, he lost
the only chance he had for some time of securing an exemption from such
annoyance, by entering Parliament to protect the liberties of the
people--an eloquent and resolute champion of freedom in trade, religion,
and everything else; and an abolitionist of everything, including,
especially, negro slavery and imprisonment for debt[2]--two execrable
violations of the natural rights of mankind.

But I have, for several minutes, lost sight of the admiring Titmouse.

"Why," thought he, "am _I_ thus spited by fortune?--The only thing she's
given _me_ is--nothing!--_D--n everything!_" exclaimed Mr. Titmouse
aloud, at the same time starting off, to the infinite astonishment of an
old peer, who had been for some minutes standing leaning against the
railing, close beside him; who was master of a magnificent fortune,
"with all appliances and means to boot;" with a fine grown-up family,
his eldest son and heir having just gained a Double First, and promising
wonders; possessing many mansions in different parts of England; a
reputation for exquisite taste and accomplishment; and being the
representative of one of the oldest families in England; but who at that
moment loathed everything and everybody, including himself, because the
minister had the day before intimated to him that he could not give him
a vacant ribbon, for which he had applied, unless he could command two
more votes in the Lower House, and which at present his lordship saw no
earthly means of doing. Yes, the Earl of Cheviotdale and Mr. Tittlebat
Titmouse were both miserable men; both had been hardly dealt with by
fortune; both were greatly to be pitied; and both quitted the Park,
about the same time, with a decided misanthropic tendency.

Mr. Titmouse walked along Piccadilly with a truly chopfallen and
disconsolate air. He very nearly felt dissatisfied even with his
personal appearance! Dress as he would, no one seemed to care a curse
for him; and, to his momentarily jaundiced eye, he seemed equipped in
only second-hand and shabby finery; and then he was really such a _poor_
devil!--Do not, however, let the reader suppose that this was an unusual
mood with Mr. Titmouse. No such thing. Like the Irishman who "married a
wife for to make him _un-aisy_;" and also not unlike the moth that
_will_ haunt the brightness which is her destruction; so poor Titmouse,
Sunday after Sunday, dressed himself out as elaborately as he had done
on the present occasion, and then always betook himself to the scene he
had just again witnessed, and which had once again excited only those
feelings of envy, bitterness, and despair, which I have been describing,
and which, on every such occasion, he experienced with, if possible,
increased intensity.

What to do with himself till it should be time to return to his
cheerless lodgings he did not exactly know; so he loitered along at a
snail's pace. He stood for some time staring at the passengers, their
luggage, and the coaches they were ascending and alighting from, and
listening to the strange medley of coachmens', guards', and porters'
vociferations, and passengers' greetings and leave-takings--always to be
observed at the White Horse Cellar. Then he passed along, till a street
row, near the Haymarket, attracted his attention and interested his
feelings; for it ended in a regular set-to between two watermen attached
to the adjoining coach-stand. Here he conceived himself looking on with
the easy air of a swell; and the ordinary penalty (paying for his
footing) was attempted to be exacted from him; but he had nothing to be
picked out of any of his pockets except that under his very nose, and
which contained his white handkerchief! This over, he struck into
Leicester Square, where, (he was in luck that night,) hurrying up to
another crowd at the farther end, he found a man preaching with infinite
energy. Mr. Titmouse looked on, and listened for two or three minutes
with apparent interest; and then, with a countenance in which pity
struggled with contempt, muttered, loud enough to be heard by all near
him, "poor devil!" and walked off. He had not proceeded many steps,
before it occurred to him that a friend--one Robert Huckaback, much such
another one as himself--lived in one of the narrow, dingy streets in the
neighborhood. He determined to take the chances of his being at home,
and if so, of spending the remainder of the evening with him.
Huckaback's quarters were in the same ambitious proximity to heaven as
his own; the only difference being, that they were a trifle cheaper and
larger. He answered the door himself, having only the moment before
returned from _his_ Sunday's excursion,--_i. e._ the Jack Straw's Castle
Tea-Gardens, at Highgate, where, in company with several of his friends,
he had "spent a jolly afternoon." He ordered in a glass of negus from
the adjoining public-house, after some discussion, which ended in an
agreement that he should stand treat that night, and Titmouse on the
ensuing Sunday night. As soon as the negus had arrived, accompanied by
two sea-biscuits, which looked so hard and hopeless that they would have
made the nerves thrill within the teeth of him that meditated attempting
to masticate them, the candle was lit; Huckaback handed a cigar to his
friend; and both began to puff away, and chatter pleasantly concerning
the many events and scenes of the day.

"Anything stirring in to-day's 'Flash?'" inquired Titmouse, as his eye
caught sight of a copy of that able and interesting Sunday newspaper,
the "SUNDAY FLASH," which Huckaback had hired for the evening from the
news-shop on the ground-floor of his lodgings.

Mr. Huckaback removed his cigar from his mouth, and holding it between
the first and second fingers of his right hand, in a knowing style, with
closed eyes and inflated cheeks, very slowly ejected the smoke which he
had last inhaled, and rose and got the paper from the top of the
drawers.

"Here's a mark of a beastly porter-pot that's been set upon it, by all
that's holy! It's been at the public-house! Too bad of Mrs. Coggs to
send it me up in this state!" said he, handling it as though its touch
were contamination.--(He was to pay only a halfpenny for the perusal of
it.) "Faugh! how it stinks!"

"What a horrid beast she must be!" exclaimed Titmouse, after, in like
manner as his friend, expelling his mouthful of smoke. "But, since
better can't be had, let's hear what news is in it. Demmee! it's the
only paper published, in my opinion, that's worth reading!--Any fights
astirring?"

"Haven't come to them yet; give a man _time_, Titty!" replied Huckaback,
fixing his feet on another chair, and drawing the candle closer to the
paper. "It says, by the way, that the Duke of Dunderhead is certainly
making up to Mrs. Thumps, the rich cheesemonger's widow;--a precious
good hit that, isn't it? You know the Duke's as poor as a rat!"

"Oh! _that's_ no news. It's been in the papers for I don't know how
long. Egad, 't will quite set him up--and no mistake. Seen the Duke
ever?"

"Ye--es! Oh, several times!" replied Huckaback. This was a lie, and
Huckaback knew that it was.

"Deuced good-looking, I suppose?"

"Why--middling; I should say middling. Know _some_ that needn't fear to
compare with _him_--eh! Tit?"--and Huckaback winked archly at his
friend, meaning him, however, to consider the words as applicable to the
speaker.

"Ah, ha, ha!--a pretty joke! But come, that's a good chap!--You can't be
reading both of those two sheets at once--give us the other sheet, and
set the candle right betwixt us!--Come, fair's the word among _gents_,
you know!"

Huckaback thus appealed to, did as his friend requested; and the two
gentlemen read and smoked for some minutes in silence.

"Well--I shall spell over the advertisements now," said Titmouse, very
emphatically; "there's a pretty lot of them--and I've read everything
else--(though precious little there is, _here_ besides!)--So, here
goes!--One _may_ hear of a prime situation, you know--and I'm quite sick
of Tag-rag!"

Another interval of silence ensued. Huckaback was deep in the ghastly
but instructive details of a trial for murder; and Titmouse, after
having glanced listlessly over the entertaining first sheet of
advertisements, was on the point of laying down his half of the paper,
when he suddenly started in his chair, turned very pale, and stammered--

"Hollo!--hollo, Hucky!--Why"----

"What's the matter, Tit?--eh?" inquired Huckaback, greatly astonished.

For a moment Titmouse made no answer, but, dropping his cigar, fixed his
eyes intently on the paper, which began to rustle in his trembling
hands. What occasioned this outbreak, with its subsequent agitation, was
the following advertisement, which appeared in the most conspicuous part
of the "SUNDAY FLASH:"--

     "NEXT OF KIN--Important.--The next of kin, if any such there be, of
     GABRIEL TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, formerly of WHITEHAVEN, cordwainer, and
     who died somewhere about the year 1793, in London, may hear of
     something of the GREATEST POSSIBLE IMPORTANCE to himself, or
     herself, or themselves, by immediately communicating with Messrs.
     QUIRK, GAMMON, and SNAP, Solicitors, Saffron Hill. No time is to be
     lost. 9th July 18--.--_The third advertisement._"

"By George! Here _is_ a go!" exclaimed Huckaback, almost as much
flustered as Titmouse over whose shoulder he had hastily read the above
paragraph.

"We aren't dreaming, Hucky--are we?" inquired Titmouse, faintly, his
eyes still glued to the newspaper.

"No--by George! Never was either of us fellows so precious wide awake in
our lives before! that I'll answer for!" Titmouse sat still, and turned
paler even than before.

"Read it up, Huck!--Let's hear how it _sounds_, and then we shall
believe it!" said he, handing the paper to his friend.

Huckaback read it aloud.

"It sounds like something, don't it?" inquired Titmouse, tremulously,
his color a little returning.

"Uncommon!--If this isn't _something_, then there's nothing in anything
any more!" replied Huckaback, solemnly, at the same time emphatically
slapping the table.

"No!--'Pon my soul! but do you really think so?" said Titmouse, seeking
still further confirmation than he had yet derived from his senses of
sight and hearing.

"I do, by jingo!" repeated Huckaback--"What a go it is!--Well, my poor
old mother used to say, 'depend on it, wonders never _will_ cease;' and
curse me if she ever said a truer word!"

Titmouse again read over the advertisement; and then picking up and
relighting his fragment of cigar, puffed earnestly in silence for some
moments.

"Such things never happens to such a poor devil of a chap as me!"
exclaimed Huckaback, with a sigh.

"What _is_ in the wind, I wonder?" muttered Titmouse. "Who
knows--hem!--who knows?--But now, _really_"---- he paused, and once more
read over the pregnant paragraph.--"It can't--no, curse me, it _can't_
be"---- he added, looking very serious.

"What, Tit? _What_ can't be?" interrupted Huckaback, eagerly.

"Why, I've been thinking--but what do _you_ think, eh?--it can't
_hardly_ be a cursed hoax of the chaps in the premises at Tag-rag's?"

"Bo!--Is there any of 'em flush enough of money to do the thing? And how
should they think it would ever come to be seen by you?--Then, besides,
there isn't a chap among them that could come up to the composing a
piece of composition like that--no, not for all a whole year's
salary--there isn't, by George! You and I couldn't do it, and, of
course, _they_ couldn't!"

"Ah! I don't know," said Titmouse, doubtfully. "But--honor!--do you
really now think there's anything in it?"

"I do--I'm blowed if I don't, Tit!" was the sententious answer.

"Tol de rol, de rol, de rol, de rol--diddl'em--daddl'em--bang!" almost
shouted Titmouse, jumping up, snapping his fingers, and dancing about in
a wild ecstasy, which lasted for nearly a minute.

"Give me your hand, Hucky," said he presently, almost breathless. "If I
_am_ a made man--tol de rol, lol de rol, lol de rol, lol!--you see,
Huck!--if I don't give you the handsomest breastpin you ever saw? No
paste! real diamond!--Hurrah! I will, by jingo!"

Huckaback grasped and squeezed his hand. "We've always been friends,
Tit--haven't we?" said he, affectionately.

"My room won't hold me to-night!" continued Titmouse; "I'm sure it
won't. I feel as if I was, as you may say, swelling all over. I'll walk
the streets all night: I couldn't sleep a wink for the life of me! I'll
walk about till the shop opens. Oh, faugh! how nasty! Confound the shop,
and Tag-rag, and everything and everybody in it! Thirty-five pounds a
year? See if I won't spend as much in cigars the first month!"

"Cigars! Is that your go? Now, _I_ should take lessons in boxing, to
begin with. It's a deuced high thing, you may depend upon it, and you
can't be fit company for swells without it, Tit! You can't, by Jove!"

"Whatever you like, whatever you like, Hucky!" cried Titmouse--adding,
in a sort of ecstasy, "I'm sorry to say it, but how _precious_ lucky
that my father and mother's dead, and that I'm an only
child--too-ra-laddy, too-ra-laddy!" Here he took such a sudden leap,
that I am sorry to say he split his trousers very awkwardly, and that
sobered him for a moment, while they made arrangements for cobbling it
up as well as might be, with a needle and thread which Huckaback always
had by him.

"We're rather jumping in the dark a-bit, aren't we, Tit?" inquired
Huckaback, while his companion was repairing the breach. "Let's look
what it all means--here it is." He read it all aloud again--"'_greatest
possible importance_!'--what _can it_ mean? Why the deuce couldn't they
speak out plainly?"

"What! in a newspaper? Lord, Hucky! how many Titmouses would start up on
all sides, if there isn't some already indeed! I wonder what '_greatest
possible importance_' can mean, now!"

"Some one's left you an awful lot of money, of course"----

"It's too good to be true"----

"Or you may have made a _smite_; you a'n't such a bad-looking fellow,
when you're dressed as you are now--you a'n't indeed, Titty!" Mr.
Titmouse was quite flustered with the mere supposition, and also looked
as sheepish as his features would admit of.

"E-e-e-eh, Hucky! how ve-ry silly you are!" he simpered.

"Or you may be found out heir to some great property, and all that kind
of thing.--But when do you intend to go to Messrs. What's-their-name? I
should say, the sooner the better. Come, you've stitched them trousers
well enough, now; they'll hold you till you get home, (you do brace up
uncommon tight!) and I'd take off my straps, if I was you. Why shouldn't
we go to these gents now? Ah, here they are--Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap, solicitors."

"I wonder if they're great men? Did you ever hear of them before?"

"Haven't I! Their names is always in this same paper; they are every day
getting people off out of all kinds of scrapes--they're the chaps _I_
should nat'rally go to if I anyhow got wrong--ahem!"

"But, my dear fellow--_Saffron Hill!_--Low that--devilish low, 'pon my
soul! Never was near it in my life."

"But they live there to be near the thieves. Lud, the thieves couldn't
do without 'em! But what's that to you! You know 'a very dirty ugly toad
has often got a jewel in his belly,' so Shakspeare or some one says.
Isn't it enough for _you_, Tit, if they can make good their
advertisement? Let's off, Tit--let's off, I say; for you mayn't be able
to get there to-morrow--your employers!"----

"My employers! Do you think, Hucky, I'm going back to business after
this?"

"Come, come, Titty--not so fast--suppose it all turns out moonshine,
after all"--quoth Huckaback, seriously.

"Lord, but I _won't_ suppose anything of the sort! It makes me sick to
think of nothing coming of it!--Let's go off at once, and see what's to
be done!"

So Huckaback put the newspaper into his pocket, blew out the candle, and
the two started on their important errand. It was well that their means
had been too limited to allow of their indulging to a greater extent
than a glass of port-wine negus (that was the name under which they had
drunk the "_publican's_ port"--_i. e._ a warm sweetened decoction of oak
bark, logwood shavings, and a little brandy) between them; otherwise,
excited as were the feelings of each of them by the discovery of the
evening, they must in all probability have been guilty of some piece of
extravagance in the streets. As it was, they talked very loudly as they
went along, and in a tone of conversation pitched perhaps a little too
high for their present circumstances, however in unison it might be with
the expected circumstances of _one_ of them.

In due time they reached the residence of which they were in search. It
was a large house, greatly superior to all its dingy neighbors; and on a
bright brass plate, a yard long at least, and a foot wide, stood the
awe-inspiring words, "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP, SOLICITORS."

"Now, Tit," whispered Huckaback, after they had paused for a second or
two--"now for it--pluck up a sperrit--ring!"

"I--I--'pon my life--I feel all of a sudden uncommon funky--I think that
last cigar of yours wasn't"----

"Stuff, Tit--ring! ring away! Faint heart never wins!"

"Well, it _must_ be done: so--here goes at any rate!" he replied; and
with a short nervous jerk, he caused a startling clatter within, which
was so distinctly audible without, that both of them instinctively
_hemmed_, as if to drown the noise which was so much greater than they
had expected. In a very few moments they heard some one undoing the
fastenings of the door, and the gentlemen looked at one another with an
expression of mingled expectation and apprehension. A little old woman
at length, with a candle in her hand, retaining the heavy door-chain in
its fastening, peered round the edge of the door at them.

"Who are you?" she exclaimed crustily.

"Is this Messrs.--What is it, Huck?--Oh! Messrs. Quirk & Co.'s?"
inquired Titmouse, tapping the end of his cane against his chin, with a
desperate effort to appear at his ease.

"Why, where's your eyes?" she replied angrily, "I should think you might
have seen what was wrote on this here plate--it's large enough, one
should have thought, to be read by them as _can_ read--Is your's Newgate
business? Because if----"

"We want--Give us the paper, Hucky"--he added, addressing his companion,
who produced it in a moment; and Titmouse would have proceeded to
possess the old lady of all his little heart, when she cut him short by
saying snappishly--"They aren't none on 'em in; nor never is on
Sundays--so you'll just call to-morrow if you wants 'em. What's your
names?"

"Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse," answered that gentleman, with a very
particular emphasis on every syllable.

"Mr. _who_?" exclaimed the old woman, opening her eyes very wide, and
raising her hand to the back of her ear. Mr. Titmouse repeated his name
more loudly and distinctly.

"Tippetytippety--what's that?"

"No, no!" exclaimed Titmouse, peevishly; "I said, Mr. Tit-el-bat
Tit-mouse!--will that suit you?"

"Tick-a-tick-a-tick?--Well, gracious! if ever I heard such a name.
Oh!--I see!--you're making a fool of me! Get off, or I'll call a
constable in!--Get along with you, you couple of jail-birds! Is this the
way"----

"I tell you," interposed Mr. Huckaback, angrily, "that this gentleman's
name is Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse; and you'd better take care what you're
at, old woman, for we've come on business of _wital consequence_!"

"I dare say it'll keep, then, till to-morrow," tartly added the old
woman.

The friends consulted for a moment, and then Titmouse asked if he might
come in and write a letter to Messrs. Quirk and Co.

"No indeed!" said she; "how do I know who you are? There's a
public-house close by, where you may write what you like, and bring it
here, and they'll get it the first thing in the morning. So that's what
you may take away with you!"--with which the complaisant old janitrix
shut the door in their faces.

"Huck, 'pon my life, I am afraid there's nothing in it," said Titmouse,
despondingly, to his friend--both of them remaining rooted to the spot.

"Oudacious old toad!" muttered Huckaback, very indignantly.

"Hucky--I'm _sure_ there's nothing in it!" exclaimed Titmouse, after a
long pause, looking earnestly at his friend, hoping to draw from him a
contrary opinion.

"I--I own I don't half like the looks of it," replied Huckaback, putting
his newspaper into his pocket again; "but we'll try if we can't write a
letter to sound 'em, and so far take the old creature's advice. Here's
the public-house she told us of. Come, let's see what's to be done!"

Titmouse, greatly depressed, followed his friend; and they soon provided
themselves with two glasses of stout, and after a little difficulty,
with implements for writing. That they made good use of their time and
materials, let the following epistle prove. It was their joint
composition, and here is an exact copy of it:--


               "_To Messrs._ QUIRK, GAMMON _and_ SNAP.

     "SIR,

     "Your Names being Put In an Advertisement in This present _Sunday
     Flash_, Newspaper of To Day's Date, Mr. T. T. Begs To inform Your
     respectable House I feel Uncommon anxious To speak with them On
     This _truly interesting subject_, seeing It mentions The Name Of
     Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse, which Two last Names Of That Deceased
     Person _my Own Name Is_, which can _Any_ Day (As soon As Possible)
     call and _prove_ To you, By telling you The Same, _truly_. He being
     Engaged in Business During the week Very close, (for The Present,)
     I hope that If they Have Anything particular To say To Him, they
     will write To me without The least Delay, and please address T. T.,
     At Tag-rag and Co.'s, No. 375, Oxford Street, Post-Paid, which will
     ensure Its Being duly Taken In By my Employers, and am,

                                         "Gents,
                                             "Your's to Command,
                                                   "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

     "P. S.--My Friend, which Is With me writing This, (Mr. Robert
     Huckaback,) can prove who I am If necessiated so to do.

     "N. B.--Shall have no objections to do the Liberal Thing if
     anything suitable Turns Up Of It.
                                                                "T. T.
                                           "(_Sunday Evening, 9/7/18--._

     "Forgot to Say, am The only Child of my Honored Parents, one of
     which (my Mother) Died; before I knew them In Lawful Wedloc, and
     Was 27 last Birth Day, Never having Seen your Advertisement Till
     This Night, w^h, if Necessary _can Prove_.)"

This perspicuous and truly elegant performance having been thrice
subjected to the critical examination of the friends, (the paragraph
concerning Huckaback having been inserted at the instance of that
gentleman, who wished to be mixed up from the beginning with so
promising an affair,) was then folded up, and directed to "Messrs. Quirk
and Co.," a great straggling wet wafer having been first put upon it. It
was safely deposited, a few minutes afterwards, with the old lady at
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's; and then the two West-End gentlemen
hastened away from that truly plebeian part of the town! Under three
different gas-lights did they stop, take out the newspaper, and spell
over the advertisement; by which ingenious processes they at length
succeeded in satisfying themselves that there _was_ something in it--a
fact of which, upon the old woman shutting the door in their faces, it
may be recollected they had had grievous misgivings. They parted,
however, with a considerable abatement of the excitement with which they
had set out on their voyage of discovery.

Mr. Titmouse did not, on reaching his room, take off and lay aside his
precious Sunday apparel with his accustomed care and deliberation. On
the contrary, he peeled it off, as it were, and threw himself on the bed
as quickly as possible, in order that he might calmly revolve the
immense event of the day in his little mind, which it had agitated like
a stone thrown into a stagnant pool by the roadside. Oh, how restless
was he!--not more so could he have been had he lain between horse-hair
sheets. He repeatedly got up and walked about two or three little steps,
which were all that his room admitted of. At the very first peep of
daylight he started out of bed, got out of his pocket the newspaper
which Huckaback had lent him, strove to decipher the advertisement, and
then sank into bed again--but not to sleep, till four or five o'clock;
having nevertheless to rise at half-past six, to resume his detested
duties at Tag-rag and Co.'s, whose shop he assisted in opening at seven
o'clock, as usual. When he and his shopmates were sitting together at
breakfast, he could not for the life of him help letting out a little,
vaguely and mysteriously, about "something that _might_ happen in the
course of the day;" and thereby succeeded in satisfying his experienced
companions that he expected the visit of a policeman, for some _row_ he
had been concerned in over-night.--Well:--eight, nine, ten o'clock wore
away heavily, and nothing transpired, alas! to vary the monotonous
duties in which Mr. Titmouse was engaged; bale after bale, and package
after package, he took down and put up again, at the bidding of pretty,
capricious customers; silk, satin, bombazines, crapes, muslins, ribbons,
gloves, he assisted in displaying, disposing of, or replacing as usual;
but it was clear that his powerful understanding could no longer settle
itself, as before, upon his responsible and arduous duties. Every other
minute he cast a feverish furtive glance towards the door. He almost
dropped, at one time, as a postman crossed from the opposite side of the
street, as if to enter their shop--then passing on immediately, however,
to the next door. Not a person, in short, entered the premises, whom he
did not scrutinize narrowly and anxiously, but in vain. No--buying and
selling was the order of the day, as usual!--Eleven o'clock struck, and
he sighed. "You don't seem well," said a pretty young woman, to whom,
in a somewhat absent manner, he was exhibiting and describing the
qualities of some cambric. "Oh--ye--es, uncommon!" he replied; "never
better, ma'am, than when so well employed!" accompanying the latter
words with what he conceived to be a very arch, but which was in fact a
very impudent, look at his fair customer. At that moment a voice called
out to him from the farther end of the shop, near the door--"Titmouse!
Wanted!"

"Coming!" he shouted, turning as white as the cambric he held in his
hands--which became suddenly cold; while his heart went thump, thump, as
he hastily exclaimed to the astonished lady, "Excuse me, ma'am, if you
please--Jones," addressing the shopman next him, "will you attend to
this lady?" and he hastened whither he had been called, amid a prevalent
grin and "hem!" from his companions on each side, as he passed along the
shop, till he reached the spot where stood the stranger who had inquired
for him. He was of a slight and gentlemanly figure, above the average
height. His countenance was very striking: he was dressed with
simplicity--somewhat carelessly perhaps; and appeared somewhere about
thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age. He bowed slightly as Titmouse
approached him, and an air of very serious surprise came over his
expressive countenance.

"Mr. Titmouse?" he inquired blandly.

"Ye-e-s, sir, at your service," replied Titmouse, trembling
involuntarily all over. The stranger again slightly inclined towards
him, and--still more slightly--touched his hat; fixing on him, at the
same time, an inquisitive penetrating eye, which really abashed, or
rather perhaps alarmed him.

"You left--you favored us by leaving--a note at our office last night,
sir, addressed to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap?" he inquired,
lowering his voice to a whisper.

"Yes, sir, hoping it was no"----

"Pray, Mr. Titmouse, can we be alone for about five or ten minutes?"

"I--I--don't exactly know, _here_, sir; I'm afraid--against the rules of
the house--but I'll ask. Here _is_ Mr. Tag-rag.--May I step into the
cloak-room with this gentleman for a few minutes, sir?" he continued,
addressing his imperious employer, who, with a pen behind his right ear,
his left hand in his breeches pocket, and his right hand impatiently
tweedling about his watch-seals, had followed Titmouse, on hearing him
inquired for in the manner I have described, and stood at a yard or
two's distance, eying the two with a truculent dissatisfied look,
wondering what on earth any one _could_ want with one of _his_ young
men.

As Mr. Tag-rag will be rather a prominent figure on my canvas, I may as
well here give the reader a slight preparatory sketch of that gentleman.
He was about fifty-two years old; a great tyrant in his little way; a
compound of ignorance, selfishness, cant, and conceit. He knew nothing
on earth except the price of his goods, and how to make the most of his
business. He was of middle size, with a tendency to corpulence; and
almost invariably wore a black coat and waistcoat, a white neck
handkerchief very primly tied, and gray trousers. He had a dull, gray
eye, with white eyelashes, and no eyebrows; a forehead which seemed
ashamed of his face, it retreated so far and so abruptly back from it;
his face was pretty deeply pitted with the small-pox; his nose--or
rather semblance of a nose--consisted of two great nostrils looking at
you--as it were, impudently--out of the middle of his face; there was a
perfect level space from cheek-bone to cheek-bone; his gray whiskers,
trimly and closely cut, came in points to each corner of his mouth,
which was large, shapeless, and sensual-looking. This may serve, for
the present, to give you an idea of the man who had contrived to excite
towards himself the hatred and contempt of everybody over whom he had
any control--with whom in fact he had anything to do.

"You know quite well, sir, we never allow anything of the sort," was his
short reply, in a very disagreeable tone and manner, to Titmouse's
modest request.

"May I beg the favor of a few minutes' private conversation with Mr.
Titmouse," said the stranger, politely, "on a matter of the last
importance to him? My name, sir, is Gammon, and I am a solicitor of the
firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap"----

"Why, sir," answered Tag-rag, somewhat cowed by the calm and
gentlemanly, but at the same time decisive manner of Mr. Gammon--"it's
really very inconvenient, and decidedly against the rules of the house,
for any of my young men to be absent on business of their own during
_my_ business hours; but--I suppose--what must be must be--I'll give him
ten minutes--and he'd better not stay longer," he subjoined
fiercely--looking significantly first at his watch, and then at
Titmouse. "It's only for the sake of my other young men, you know, sir.
In a large establishment like ours, we're obliged, you know, sir," &c.
&c. &c., he added, in a low cringing tone, deprecatory of the
contemptuous air with which he _felt_ that Mr. Gammon was regarding him.

That gentleman, with a slight bow, and a sarcastic smile, presently
quitted the shop, accompanied by Titmouse, who scarce knew whether his
head or heels were uppermost.

"How far do you live from this place, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Mr.
Gammon, as soon as they had got into the street.

"Not four minutes' walk, sir; but--hem!"--he was flustered at the idea
of showing so eminent a person into his wretched room--"Suppose we were
to step into this tavern here, sir--I dare say they have a room at our
service"----

"Pray, allow me to ask, Mr. Titmouse--have you any private
papers--family writings, or things of that sort, at your rooms?"

Titmouse seemed considering.

"I--I think I have, sir," he replied--"one or two--but they're of no
consequence."

"Are you a _judge_ on that point, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Mr. Gammon,
with a smile; "pray let us, my dear sir, at once proceed to your
rooms--time is very short and valuable. I should vastly like to look at
these same insignificant papers of yours!"

In less than two minutes' further time, Mr. Gammon was sitting at
Titmouse's little rickety round table, at his lodgings, with a sheet of
paper before him, and a small pencil-case in his hand, asking him a
number of questions concerning his birth and family connections, and
taking down his answers very carefully. Mr. Titmouse was surprised at
the gentleman's knowledge of the family history of the Titmouses. As for
papers, &c., Mr. Titmouse succeeded in producing four or five old
letters and memoranda from the bottom of his trunk, and one or two
entries, in faded ink, on the fly-leaf of a Bible of his father's, which
he did not recollect having opened before for very many years, and of
which said entries, till pressed on the subject by Mr. Gammon, he had
been hardly aware of even the existence. With these several documents
Mr. Gammon was so much struck that he proposed to take them away with
him, for better and more leisurely examination, and safer custody, at
their office; but Mr. Titmouse significantly hinted at his very recent
acquaintance with Mr. Gammon, who, he intimated, was at liberty to come
and make exact copies of them whenever he pleased, in his (Mr.
Titmouse's) presence.

"Oh, certainly--yes," replied Mr. Gammon, slightly coloring at the
distrust implied by this observation; "I applaud your caution, Mr.
Titmouse. By all means keep these documents, and most carefully;
because, (I do not say that they _are_,) but it is quite possible that
they may become rather valuable--to _you_."

"Thank you, sir; and now, hoping you'll excuse the liberty," said
Titmouse, with a very anxious air, "I should most uncommonly like to
know what all this means--what is to turn up out of it all?"

"The law, my dear sir, is proverbially uncertain"----

"Oh, Lord! but the law can surely give one a _hint_"----

"_The law never hints_," interrupted Mr. Gammon, impressively, with a
bland smile.

"Well then, how did you come, sir, to know that there ever was such a
person as Mr. Gabriel Titmouse, my father? And what can come from _him_,
seeing he was only a bit of a shoemaker--unless he's _heir_ to
something?"

"Ah, yes--exactly; those are very interesting questions, Mr.
Titmouse--very!"----

"Yes, sir; and them and many more I was going to ask long ago, but I saw
you were"----

"Sir, I perceive that we have positively been absent from your place of
business nearly an hour--your employers will be getting rather
impatient."

"Meaning no offence, sir--bother _their_ impatience! _I'm_ impatient, I
assure you, to know what all this means. Come, sir, 'pon my life I've
told _you_ everything! It isn't quite fair!"

"Why, certainly, you see, Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon, with an agreeable
smile--(it was that smile of his which had been the making of Mr.
Gammon)--"it is only candid in me to acknowledge that your curiosity is
perfectly reasonable, and your frankness very obliging; and I see no
difficulty in admitting at once, that _I have_ had a--motive"----

"Yes, sir--and all that--_I_ know, sir,"--hastily interrupted Titmouse,
but without irritating or disturbing the placid speaker.

"And that we waited with some anxiety for the result of our
advertisement."

"Ah, you can't escape from _that_, you know, sir!" interposed Titmouse,
with a confident air.

"But it is a maxim with us, my dear sir, never to be premature in
anything, especially when it may be--very prejudicial; you've really no
idea, my dear Mr. Titmouse, of the world of mischief that is often done
by precipitancy in legal matters; and in the present stage of the
business--the _present_ stage, my dear sir--I really do see it necessary
not to--do anything premature, and without consulting my partners."

"Lord, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse, getting more and more irritated and
impatient as he reflected on the length of his absence from Tag-rag &
Co.'s.

"I quite feel for your anxiety--so perfectly natural"----

"Oh, dear sir! if you'd only tell me the _least bit_"----

"If, my dear sir, I were to disclose just now the exact object we had in
inserting that advertisement in the papers"----

"How did you come to know of it at all, sir? Come, there can't be any
harm in _that_ anyhow"----

"Not the least, my dear sir. It was in the course of business--in the
course of business."

"Is it money that's been left me--or--anything of that sort?"

"It quite pains me, I assure you, Mr. Titmouse, to suppose that our
having put this advertisement into the papers may have misled you, and
excited false hopes--I think, by the way"--added Gammon, suddenly, as
something occurred to him of their previous conversation, which he was
not quite sure of--"you told me that that Bible had been given you by
your father."

"Oh yes, sir! yes--- no doubt of it; surely _that_ can't signify, seeing
he's dead, and I'm his only son?" asked Titmouse, quickly and eagerly.

"Oh, 'tis only a circumstance--a mere circumstance; but in business, you
know, Mr. Titmouse, every little helps--and you really, by the way, have
no recollection of your mother, Mr. Titmouse?"

"No, sir, I said so! And--meaning no offence, sir--I can't abide being
put off in this kind of way,--I must own!--See what I have told
you--you've told _me_ nothing at all. I hope you haven't been only
making me a cat's-paw of? 'Pon my soul, I _hate_ being made a cat's-paw
of, sir!"

"Good heavens, Mr. Titmouse! how can you imagine it? Matters in some
degree connected with one or two former members of your family, are at
this moment the object of some little of our anxiety"----

"Not meaning it rudely, sir--please to tell me at once, plainly, am I to
be the better for anything you're now about, or was that advertisement
all fudge?"

"That may or may not be, sir," answered Mr. Gammon, in the same
imperturbable manner, drawing on his gloves, and rising from his chair.
"In justice to yourself, and other parties concerned"----

"Oh! is anybody to _share_ in it?" exclaimed Titmouse, alarmedly.

"I am sure," said Gammon, smiling, "that you will give us credit for
consulting your best interests, if they should prove to be in any degree
concerned in our present inquiries! We should, in that event, sincerely
desire to advance them. But--it is _really_," looking at his watch,
"upwards of an hour since we quitted your place of business--I fear I
shall get into disgrace with that respectable gentleman, your employer.
Will you favor us with a call at our office to-morrow night, when the
business of the day is over? When do you quit at night?"

"About half-past nine o'clock, sir; but really--to-morrow night!
Couldn't I come to-night, sir?"

"Not to-night, I fear, my dear sir. We have a very important engagement.
Let us say to-morrow night, at a quarter past ten--shall we say that
hour?" inquired Mr. Gammon, with an imperative smile.

"Well, sir, if not before--yes--I'll be with you. But I _must_ say"----
quoth Titmouse, with a sulky disconcerted air.

"Good-day, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon--they were by this time in
Oxford Street again.--"Good-day, my dear sir--good-day--to-morrow night,
as soon after ten as possible--eh? Good-by."

This was all that Mr. Titmouse could get out of Mr. Gammon, who, hailing
a coach off the stand beside them, got in, and it was soon making its
way eastward. What a miserable mixture of doubts, hopes, and fears, had
he left Titmouse! He felt as if he were a squeezed orange; he had told
everything he knew about himself, and got nothing in return out of the
smooth, imperturbable, impenetrable Mr. Gammon, but empty
civilities.--"Lord, Lord!" thought Titmouse, as Mr. Gammon's coach
turned the corner; "what would I give to know half about it that that
gent knows! But Mr. Tag-rag! by Jove! what _will_ he say? It's struck
twelve. I've been more than an hour away--and he gave me ten minutes!
Sha'n't I catch it?"

And he did. Almost the very first person whom he met, on entering the
shop, was his respected employer; who, plucking his watch out of his
fob, and looking furiously at it, motioned the trembling Titmouse to
follow him to the farther end of the long shop, where there happened to
be then no customers.

"Is this your ten minutes, sir, eh?"

"I am sorry"----

"Where may you have been, sir, all this while?"

"With that gentleman, sir, and I really did not know"----

"You didn't know, sir! Who cares what you know, or don't know? _This_,
at any rate, you know--that you ought to have been back fifty-five
minutes ago, sir. You do, sir! Isn't your time my property, sir? Don't I
pay for it, sir? An hour!--in the middle of the day! I've not had such a
thing happen this five years! I'll stop it out of your salary, sir."

Titmouse did not attempt to interrupt him.

"And pray what have you been gossiping about, sir, in this disgraceful
manner?"

"Something that he wanted to say to me, sir."

"You low puppy!--do you suppose I don't see your impertinence? I
_insist_, sir, on knowing what all this gossiping with that fellow has
been about?"

"Then you _won't_ know, sir, that's flat!" replied Titmouse, doggedly;
returning to his usual station behind the counter.

"I _sha'n't_!!" exclaimed Mr. Tag-rag, almost aghast at the presumption
of his inferior.

"No, sir, you _sha'n't_ know a single word about it."

"Sha'n't know a single word about it! Vastly good, sir!!--Do you know
whom you're talking to, sir? Do you really know in whose presence you
are, sir?" inquired Mr. Tag-rag, nearly trembling with rage.

"Mr. Tag-rag, I presume, of the firm of Tag-rag and Co.," replied
Titmouse, looking him full in the face.--One or two of his companions
near him, almost turned pale at the audacity he was displaying.

"And who are _you_, sir, that dare to presume to bandy words with ME,
sir?" inquired Tag-rag, his deeply pitted face having turned quite
white, and his whole body quivering with rage.

"Tittlebat Titmouse, at your service," was the answer, in a glib tone,
and with a sufficiently saucy air; for Titmouse then felt that he had
passed the Rubicon.

"You heard that, I hope?" inquired Tag-rag, with forced calmness, of a
pale-faced young man, the nearest to him.

"Ye--es, sir," was the meekly reluctant answer.

"This day month you leave, sir!" said Mr. Tag-rag, solemnly--as if
conscious that he was passing a sort of sentence of death upon the
presumptuous delinquent.

"Very well, Mr. Tag-rag--anything that pleases you pleases your humble
servant. I _will_ go this day month, and welcome--I've long wished--and
now, p'r'aps," he added significantly--"it's rather convenient than
otherwise"----

"Then you _sha'n't_ leave, sir," said Tag-rag, furiously.

"But I will, sir. You've given me warning; and, if you haven't, now I
give _you_ warning," replied Titmouse; turning, however, very pale, and
experiencing a certain sudden sinking of the heart--for this was a
serious and most unlooked-for event, and for a while put out of his head
all the agitating thoughts of the last few hours. Poor Titmouse had
enough to bear--what with the delicate raillery and banter of his
refined companions for the rest of the day, find the galling tyranny of
Mr. Tag-rag, (who dogged him about all day, setting him about the most
menial and troublesome offices he could, and constantly saying
mortifying things to him before customers,) and the state of miserable
suspense in which Mr. Gammon had thought fit to leave him; I say that
surely all this was enough for him to bear without having to encounter
at night, as he did, on his return to his lodgings, his blustering
landlady, who vowed that if she sold him out and out she would be put
off no longer--and his pertinacious and melancholy tailor, who, with
sallow unshaven face, told him of five children at home, all ill of the
small-pox, and his wife in an hospital--and he _implored_ a payment on
account. This sufferer succeeded in squeezing out of Titmouse seven
shillings on account, and his landlady extorted ten; which staved off a
distress--direful word!--for some week or two longer; and so they left
him in the possession of eight shillings or so, to last till next
quarter-day--six weeks off! He sighed heavily, barred his door, and sat
down opposite his little table, on which was nothing but a solitary thin
candle, and on which his eyes rested unconsciously, till the stench of
it, burning right down into the socket, roused him from his wretched
revery. Then he unlocked his box, and took out his Bible and the papers
which had been produced to Mr. Gammon, and gazed at them with intense
but useless scrutiny. Unable to conjecture what bearing they could have
upon himself or his fortunes, he hastily replaced them in his box, threw
off his clothes, and flung himself on his bed, to pass a far more dismal
night than he had known for years.

He ran the gantlet at Messrs. Tag-rag and Co.'s all Tuesday as he had
done on the day preceding. One should have supposed that when his
companions beheld him persecuted by their common tyrant, whom they all
equally hated, they would have made common cause with their suffering
companion, or at all events given no countenance to his persecution; yet
it was far otherwise. Without stopping to analyze the feeling which
produced it, (and which the moderately reflective reader may easily
analyze for himself if so disposed,) I am grieved to have to say, that
when all the young men saw that Tag-rag would be gratified by their
_cutting_ poor Titmouse, who, with all his little vanities, fooleries,
and even selfishness, had never personally offended or injured any of
them--they did cut him; and, when Tag-rag observed it, his miserable
mind was unspeakably gratified with what they had done: and he spoke to
all of them with unusual blandness; to the sinner, Titmouse, with
augmented bitterness and sternness.




CHAPTER II.


A few minutes after ten o'clock that night, a gentle ringing at the bell
of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's office, announced the arrival of
poor Titmouse. The door was quickly opened by a very fashionably dressed
clerk, who seemed in the act of quitting for the night.

"Ah--Mr. Titmouse, I presume?" he inquired, with a kind of deference in
his manner to which Titmouse had never been accustomed.

"The same, sir--Tittlebat Titmouse."

"Oh! allow me, sir, to show you in to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; I
know they're expecting to see you. It's not often they're here so late!
Walk in, sir"---- With this he led the way to an inner room, and opening
a green-baize door in the farther side of it, announced and showed in
Mr. Titmouse, and left him--sufficiently flustered. Three gentlemen were
sitting at a large table, on which he saw, by the strong but
circumscribed light of two shaded candlesticks, were lying a great
number of papers and parchments. The three gentlemen rose when he
entered, Mr. Quirk and Mr. Snap involuntarily starting on first catching
sight of the figure of Titmouse: Mr. Gammon came and shook hands with
him.

"Mr. Titmouse," said he, with a very polite air, "let me introduce you
to Mr. Quirk"--(This was the senior partner, a short, stout elderly
gentleman, dressed in black, with a shining bald crown fringed with
white hair, and sharp black eyes, and who looked very earnestly, nay,
with even a kind of dismay, at him)--"and Mr. Snap"--(This was the
junior partner, having recently been promoted to be such after ten
years' service in the office, as managing clerk: he was about thirty,
particularly well dressed, slight, active, and with a face like a
terrier--_so_ hard, sharp, and wiry!) Of Mr. Gammon himself, I have
already given the reader a slight notion. He appeared altogether a
different style of person from both his partners. He was of most
gentlemanly person and bearing--and at once acute, cautious, and
insinuating--with a certain something about the eye, which had from the
first made Titmouse feel uneasy on looking at him.

"A seat, sir," said Mr. Quirk, rising, and placing a chair for him, on
which he sat down, they resuming theirs.

"You are punctual, Mr. Titmouse!" exclaimed Mr. Gammon, kindly; "more so
than, I fear, you were yesterday, after our long interview, eh? Pray
what did that worthy person, Mr. Rag-bag--or whatever his name is--say
on your return?"

"Say, gents?"--(he tried to clear his throat, for he spoke somewhat more
thickly, and his heart beat more perceptibly than usual)--"Meaning no
offence--I'm ruined by it, and no mistake."

"Ruined! I'm sorry to hear it," interposed Mr. Gammon, with a concerned
air.

"I am, indeed, sir. Such a towering rage as he has been in ever since;
and he's given me warning to go on the 10th of next month." He thought
he observed a faint smile flit over the faces of all three. "He has,
indeed!"

"Dear me, Mr. Titmouse!--Did he allege any reason for dismissing you?"
keenly inquired Mr. Quirk.

"Yes, sir"----

"What might it have been?"

"Stopping out longer than I was allowed, and refusing to tell him what
this gentleman and I had been talking about."

"Don't think that'll do; sure it won't!" briskly exclaimed Mr. Snap; "no
just cause of dismissal that," and he jumped up, whisked down a book
from the shelves behind him, and eagerly turned over the leaves.

"Never mind that now, Mr. Snap," said Mr. Quirk, rather petulantly;
"surely we have other matters to talk about to-night!"

"Asking pardon, sir, but I think it _does_ matter to me, sir,"
interposed Titmouse; "for on the 10th of next month I'm a beggar--being
next door to it _now_."

"Not quite, we trust," said Mr. Gammon, with a benignant smile.

"But Mr. Tag-rag said he'd make me as good as one."

"That's evidence to show malice," again eagerly interjected Mr. Snap,
who was a second time tartly rebuffed by Mr. Quirk; even Mr. Gammon
turning towards him with a surprised--"Really, Mr. Snap!"

"So Mr. Tag-rag said he'd make you a beggar?" inquired Mr. Quirk.

"He vowed he would, sir!--He did, as true as the gospel, sir!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Mr. Quirk and Mr. Gammon--but such a laugh!--not
careless or hearty, but subdued, and with a dash of deference in it.
"Well--it perhaps _may_ not signify much, by that time;" said Mr. Quirk,
and laughed again, followed by the soft laugh of Mr. Gammon, and a kind
of sharp quick sound, like a bark, from Mr. Snap.

"But, gents, you'll excuse me if I say I think it _does_ signify to
_me_, and a'n't any laughing matter, by any means!" quoth Titmouse,
earnestly, and coloring with anger. "Without being rude, I'd rather come
to business, if there's any to be done, without so much laughing at
one."

"Laughing at you! my dear sir,--no, no!" exclaimed all three in a
breath--"laughing _with_ you," said Mr. Quirk!--"By the time you
mention, you may perhaps be able to laugh at Mr. Rag-bag, and everybody
else, for"----

[--"No use mincing matters?" he whispered, in a low tone, to Mr. Gammon,
who nodded, but in apparently very reluctant acquiescence, and fixed his
eyes earnestly on Titmouse.]

"I really think we are warranted, sir, in preparing you to expect by
that time--that is, you will understand, sir, if our efforts are
successful in your behalf, and if you yield yourself implicitly in all
things to our guidance--_that is absolutely essential_--a prospect--we
say at present, you will observe, _only_ a prospect--of a surprising and
splendid change in your circumstances!" Titmouse began to tremble
violently, his heart beat rapidly, and his hands were bedewed with a
cold moisture.

"I hear, gents," said he, thickly; and he also heard a faint ringing in
his ears.

"It's not impossible, sir, in plain English," continued Mr. Quirk,
himself growing a little excited with the important communication which
trembled on the tip of his tongue, "that you may at no distant time (if
you really turn out to be the person we are in search of) be put into
possession of an estate of somewhere about Ten Thousand a-year"----

The words seemed to have struck Titmouse blind--as he saw nothing for
some moments; then everything appeared to be swimming around him, and he
felt a sort of faintness or sickness stealing over him. They had hardly
been prepared for their communication's affecting their little visitor
so powerfully. Mr. Snap hastened out, and in again, with a glass of
water; and the earnest attentions of the three soon restored Mr.
Titmouse to his senses. It was a good while, however, before he could
appreciate the little conversation which they now and then addressed to
him, or estimate the full importance of the astounding intelligence
which Mr. Quirk had just communicated, "Beg pardon--but may I make free
to ask for a little brandy and cold water, gents? I feel all over in a
kind of tremble," said he, some little time afterwards.

"Yes--by all means, Mr. Titmouse," replied Mr. Quirk--"Mr. Snap, will
you be kind enough to order Betty to bring in a glass of cold brandy and
water from the Jolly Thieves, next door?"--Snap shot out, gave the
order, and returned in a trice. The old woman in a few minutes' time
followed, with a large tumbler of dark brandy and water, quite hot, for
which Mr. Gammon apologized, but Mr. Titmouse said he preferred it
so--and soon addressed himself to the inspiriting mixture. It quickly
manifested its influence, reassuring him wonderfully. As he sat sipping
it, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap being engaged in an earnest
conversation, of which he could not comprehend a word, he had leisure to
look about him, and observed that there was lying before them a large
sheet of paper, at which they all of them often and earnestly looked,
filled with marks, so--

[Illustration:
                 |
        ------------------
        |                |
  ------------     -------------
  |          |     |           |
                           ---------
                           |       |
]

with writing at the ends of each of them, and round and square figures.
When he saw them all bending over and scrutinizing this mysterious
object, it puzzled him (and many a better head than his has a pedigree
puzzled before) sorely, and he began to suspect it was a sort of
conjuring paper!--

"I hope, gents, that paper's all right--eh?" said he, supported by the
brandy, which he had nearly finished. They turned towards him with a
smile of momentary surprise, and then--

"We hope so--a vast deal depends on it," said Mr. Quirk, looking over
his glasses at Titmouse. Now what _he_ had hinted at, as far as he could
venture to do so, was a thought that glanced across his as yet unsettled
brain, that there might have been invoked more than _mere earthly
assistance_; but he prudently pressed the matter no farther--that was
all Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's look-out; _he_ had been no party
to anything of the sort, nor would he knowingly. He also observed the
same sheets of paper written all over, which Mr. Gammon had filled up at
his (Titmouse's) room, the night before; and several new, and
old-looking, papers and parchments. Sometimes they addressed questions
to him, but found it somewhat difficult to keep his attention up to
anything that was said to him for the wild visions which were chasing
one another through his heated brain; the passage of which said visions
was not a little accelerated by the large tumbler of brandy and water
which he had just taken.

"Then, in point of fact," said Mr. Quirk, as Messrs. Gammon and Snap
simultaneously sat down, after having been for some time standing poring
over the paper before Mr. Quirk. "This Tittlebat Titmouse's title must
have accrued in 18--. That's the point--eh, Gammon?"

"Precisely so," said Mr. Gammon, calmly.

"To be sure," confidently added Snap; who having devoted himself
exclusively all his life to the sharpest practice of the criminal law,
knew about as much of real property law as a snipe--but it would not
have done to appear ignorant, or taking no part in the matter, in the
presence of the heir-at-law, and the future great client of the House.

"Well, Mr. Titmouse," at length said Mr. Quirk, with a sort of grunt,
laying aside his glasses--"if _you_ turn out to be the Titmouse we have
been speaking of, you are likely, through our immense exertions, to
become one of the luckiest men that ever lived! We may be mistaken, but
it appears to us that we shall by and by be able to put you into
possession of a very fine estate in Yorkshire, worth some £10,000 or
£12,000 a-year at the least!"

"You--don't--say--so!" exclaimed Titmouse, elevating his hands and
opening his eyes with amazement--"Oh, gents, I do believe we're all
dreaming! Is it all true, indeed?"

"It is, Mr. Titmouse--and we are very proud and happy indeed to be the
honored instruments of establishing your rights, my dear sir," said Mr.
Gammon, in a most impressive manner.

"Then all the money that's been spent this ten or twelve years has been
_my_ money, has it?"

"_If_ we are right, it is undoubtedly as you say," answered Mr. Quirk,
giving a quick apprehensive glance at Mr. Gammon.

"Then there'll be a jolly reckoning for some one, shortly--eh? My
stars!"

"My dear Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon, gravely, "you have no more than
a just regard for your own interests. There _will_ be a reckoning, and a
very terrible one ere long, for somebody--but we've a vast deal to go
through, and a vast deal of money to be spent, before we come to discuss
_that_ matter! Only let us have the unspeakable happiness of seeing you
once fairly in possession of your estates, and our office shall know no
rest till you have got all you may be entitled to--even to the
uttermost farthing!"

"Oh, never fear our letting them rest!" said Mr. Quirk, judiciously
accommodating himself to the taste and apprehension of his excited
auditor--"Those that must give up the goose, must give up the giblets
also--ha, ha, ha!" Messrs. Gammon and Snap echoed the laugh, duly
tickled with the joke of the head of the firm.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Mr. Titmouse, immensely excited by the conjoint
influence of the brandy, and the news of the night; "capital! capital!
hurrah! Such goings on there will be! You're all of the right sort,
gents, I see! 'Pon my life, law for ever! There's _nothing_ like it!
Let's all shake hands, gents! Come, if you please, all together! all
friends to-night!" And the little fellow grasped each of the three
readily-proffered right hands of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, with
an energy that was likely to make all the high contracting parties to
that quadruple alliance, remember its ratification.

"And is it all a _ready-money_ affair, gents?--or _rent_, and all _that_
kind of thing?" he inquired, after many eloquent expressions of delight.

"Why, almost entirely the latter," answered Mr. Quirk, "except the
accumulations."

"Then, 'pon my soul--I'm a great landlord, am I?"

"Indeed, my dear Mr. Titmouse, you are--(that is, unless we have made a
blunder such as--I will say--our house is not _often_ in the habit of
making)--and have two very fine houses, one in town and the other in the
country."

"Capital! delightful! I'll live in both of them--we'll have _such_
goings on!--And is it _quite_ up to the mark of £10,000 a-year?"

"We really entertain no doubt at present that it is"----

"And such as that I can spend all of it, every year?"

"Certainly--no doubt of it--not the least. The rents are paid with most
exemplary punctuality--at least," added Mr. Gammon, with a captivating,
an irresistible smile, and taking him affectionately by the hand--"at
least they _will_ be, as soon as we have them fairly in _our_
management."

"Oh, _you're_ to get it all in for me, are you?" he inquired briskly.
The three partners bowed, with the most deprecatingly-disinterested air
in the world; intimating that, for _his_ sake, they were ready to take
upon themselves even _that_ troublesome responsibility.

"Capital! couldn't be better! couldn't be better! Ah, ha, ha--you've
catched the goose, and must bring me its eggs. Ah, ha, ha! a touch in
_your_ line, old gent!" said he, slapping Mr. Quirk's knee.

"Ha, ha, ha! excellent! ah, ha, ha!" laughed the three partners at the
wit of their new client. Mr. Titmouse joined them, and snapped his
fingers in the air. Then he added suddenly--

"Lord--by the way--I've just thought of Tag-rag and Company's--I seem as
if I hadn't seen or heard of those gents for Lord knows how long! Only
fancy old Tag-rag making me a beggar on the 10th of next month--ha, ha,
ha!--I sha'n't see _that_ infernal hole any more, anyhow!"

["There!" whispered Mr. Gammon, suddenly and apprehensively, in the ear
of Mr. Quirk, "you hear that? A little wretch! We have been perfectly
insane in going so far already with him! Is not this what I
predicted?"--"I don't care," said Mr. Quirk, stubbornly. "Who first
found it out, Mr. Gammon? and who's to be at the expense and
responsibility? Pshaw! I know what I'm about--_I'll_ make him knuckle
down--never fear me! Caleb Quirk a'n't a man to be trifled with!"]

"_That_," continued Titmouse, snapping his fingers with an air of
defiance--"for Mr. Tag-rag! _That_ for Mother Squallop--Ah, ha, gents!
It won't do to go back to that--eugh!--eh? will it?--you know what I
mean! Fancy Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse--or Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse,
_Esquire_--standing behind"----

The partners looked rather blank at this unexpected sally.

"We would venture to suggest, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon, seriously,
"the _absolute necessity_ there is for everything on your part, and our
parts, to go on as quietly as before, for a little time to come: to be
safe and successful, my dear sir, we must be very--very _secret_."

"Oh, I see, gents! I see; mum--mum's the word, for the present! But, I
_must_ say, if there is any one whom I want to hear of it, sooner than
another, it's"----

"Rag-bag and Co., I suppose! ha, ha, ha!" interrupted Mr. Gammon, his
partners echoing his gentle laugh.

"Ha, ha, ha! Cuss the cats--that's it--ha, ha, ha!" echoed Mr. Titmouse;
who, getting up out of his chair, could not resist capering to and fro,
sticking his hands on his hips, in something of the attitude of a
hornpipe dancer, whistling and humming by turns, and indulging in
various other wild antics.

"And now, gents--excuse me, but, to do a bit of business--when am I to
_begin_ scattering the shiners, eh?" he inquired, interrupting a
low-toned, but somewhat vehement conversation, between the two senior
partners; while Snap sat silently eying him like a terrier a rat coming
within his reach!

"Oh, of course, sir!" replied Mr. Gammon, rather coldly,
"very--considerable--delay is unavoidable. All we have done, as yet, is
to discover that, as far as we are advised, and can judge, you will turn
out to be the right owner; but--as we've already intimated--very
extensive and expensive operations must be immediately commenced, before
you can be put into possession. There are some who won't be persuaded to
_part_ with £10,000 a-year, Mr. Titmouse, for the mere asking!" added
Mr. Gammon, with an anxious and bitter smile.

"The devil there are! _Who_ are they that want to keep me any longer out
of what's my own?--what's justly mine? Eh? I want to know! Haven't they
kept me out long enough?--hang 'em! Put 'em in prison directly--don't
spare 'em--the villains!"

"They'll probably, ere long, find their way in that direction--for how,"
replied Mr. Quirk, "he's ever to make up, poor devil, the mesne
profits"----

"_Mean_ profits?--is that all you call them, gents? 'Pon my life, it's
rogue's money--villain's profits! So don't spare him--d--n him!--he's
robbed the fatherless, which I am, and an orphan. Keep me out of what's
mine, indeed! Curse me if he shall, though!"

"My dear Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon, very gravely, "we are getting on
too fast--dreadfully too fast. It will never do, matters of such immense
importance as these cannot be hurried on, or talked of, in this way"----

"I like that, sir!--I do, by Jove!"--exclaimed Titmouse, scornfully.

"You will really, if you go on in this wild way, Mr. Titmouse, make us
regret the trouble we have taken in the affair, and especially the
promptness with which we have communicated to you the extent of your
_possible_ good fortune."

"Beg pardon, I'm sure, gents, but mean no offence: am monstrous obliged
to you for what you've done for me--but, by Jove, it's taken me rather
a-back, I own, to hear that I'm to be kept so long out of it all! Why
can't you offer him, whoever he is that has my property, a slapping sum
to go out at once? Gents, I'll own to you I'm most uncommon low--never
so low in my life--devilish low! Done up, and yet it seems a'n't to get
what's justly mine! What am I to do in the meanwhile? Consider _that_,
gents!"

"You are rather excited just now, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Quirk,
seriously; "suppose we now break up, and resume our conversation
to-morrow, when we are all in better and calmer trim?"

"No, sir, thanking you all the same; but I think we'd better go on with
it now," replied Titmouse, impetuously. "Do you think I can stoop to go
back to that nasty, beastly shop, and stand behind that odious
counter?--I'd almost as lieve go to the gallows!"

"Our _decided_ opinion, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Quirk, emphatically--his
other partners getting graver and graver in their looks--"that is, if
our opinion is worth offering"----

"That, by Jove! remains to be seen," said Titmouse, with a pettish shake
of the head.

"Well, such as it is, we offer it you; and it is, that for many reasons
you must continue, for a little while longer, in your present
situation"----

"What! own Tag-rag for my master--and I worth £10,000 a-year?"
interrupted Titmouse, furiously.

"My dear sir, you've not _got_ it yet," said Mr. Quirk, with a very
bitter smile.

"Do you think you'd have told me what you have, if you weren't sure that
I _should_, though? No, no! you've gone too far, by Jove!--but I shall
burst, I shall! Me to go on as before!--they use me worse and worse
every day. Gents, you'll excuse me--I hope you will; but business is
business, gents--it is; and if you won't do mine, I must look out for
them that will--'pon my soul, I must, and"--If Mr. Titmouse could have
seen, or having seen, appreciated, the looks which the three partners
interchanged, on hearing this absurd, ungrateful, and insolent speech of
his--the expression that flitted across their shrewd faces; that was, of
intense contempt for him, hardly overmastered and concealed by a vivid
perception of their own interest, which was, of course, to _manage_, to
soothe, to conciliate him!

How the reptile propensities of his mean nature had thriven beneath the
sudden sunshine of unexpected prosperity!--See already his selfishness,
truculence, rapacity, in full play!

"So, gents," said he, after a long and keen expostulation with them on
the same subject, "I'm really to go to-morrow morning to Tag-rag and
Co.'s, and go on with the cursed life I led there to-day, all as if
nothing had happened--ha, ha, ha!--I do so like that!"

"In your present humor, Mr. Titmouse, it would be in vain to discuss the
matter," said Mr. Quirk, sternly. "Again I tell you that the course we
have recommended is, in our opinion, the proper one; excuse me if I add,
that you are entirely in our hands--and if I ask you--what _can_ you do
but adopt our advice?"

"Why, hang me if I won't employ somebody else--that's flat! S' elp me,
Heaven, I will! So, good-night, gents; you'll find that Tittlebat
Titmouse isn't to be trifled with!" So saying, Mr. Titmouse clapped his
hat on his head, bounced out of the room, and, no attempt being made to
stop him, he was in the street in a twinkling.

Mr. Gammon gazed at Mr. Quirk with a look, the significance of which the
astounded old gentleman thoroughly understood--'twas compounded of
triumph, reproach, and apprehension.

"Did you ever see such a little beast!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, with an air
of disgust, turning to Mr. Snap.

"Beggar on horseback!" exclaimed Snap, with a bitter sneer.

"It won't do, however," said Mr. Quirk, with a most chagrined and
apprehensive air, "for him to go at large in his present frame of
mind--he may ruin the thing altogether"----

"As good as £500 a-year out of the way of the office," quoth Snap.

"It cannot be helped _now_," said Mr. Gammon, with a sigh of vexation,
turning to Mr. Quirk, and seizing his hat--"he must be managed--so I'll
go after him instantly, and bring him back at all hazards; and we must
really try and do something for him in the meanwhile, to keep him quiet
till the thing's brought a little into train." So out went after
Titmouse, Mr. Gammon, from whose lips dropped persuasion sweeter than
honey;[3] and I should not be surprised if he were to succeed in
bringing back that little stubborn piece of conceited stupidity.

As soon as Mr. Titmouse heard the street door shut after him with a kind
of _bang_, he snapped his fingers once or twice, by way of letting off a
little of the inflammable air that was in him, and muttered, "Pretty
chaps those, upon my soul!" said he, disdainfully. "I'll expose them
all! I'll apply to the lord-mayor--they're a pack of swindlers, they
are! This is the way they treat _me_, who've got a title to £10,000
a-year! To be sure"--He stood still for a moment--and another
moment--and another--and then dismay came quickly over him; for the
thought suddenly occurred to his partially obfuscated intellect--what
_hold_ had he got on Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap?--what _could_ he
do?--or rather, what HAD he done?

Ah--the golden vision of the last few hours was fading away
momentarily, like a dream! Each second of his deep and rapid reflection,
rendered more impetuous his desire and determination to return and make
his peace with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. By submission for the
present, he could get the whip-hand of them hereafter! He was in the act
of turning round towards the office, when Mr. Gammon gently laid his
hand upon the shoulder of his repentant client.

"Mr. Titmouse! my dear sir," said Mr. Gammon, softly, "what is the
matter with you? How could we so misunderstand each other?"

Titmouse's small cunning was on the _qui vive_, and he saw and followed
up his advantage. "I am going," said he, in a resolute tone, "to speak
to some one else in the morning."

"Ah, to be sure!" replied Mr. Gammon, with a smile of utter
unconcern--"I supposed as much--'tis a matter which of course, however,
signifies nothing to any one--but yourself. You will take any steps, my
dear sir, that occur to you, and act as you may be advised!"

"Monstrous kind of you, 'pon my life! to come and give me such good
advice!" exclaimed Titmouse, with a sneer--but consciously baffled.

"Oh, don't mention it!" said Gammon, coolly; "I came out of pure
good-nature, to assure you that our office, notwithstanding what has
passed, entertains not the slightest personal ill feeling towards you,
in thus throwing off our hands a fearfully expensive, and most harassing
enterprise--which we have feared from the first had been too rashly
undertaken"----

"Hem!" exclaimed Titmouse, involuntarily, once or twice.

"So good-night, Mr. Titmouse--good-night! God bless you! and think
hereafter of all this as a mere idle dream--as far as _we_ are
concerned!" Mr. Gammon, in the act of returning to the door, extended
his hand to Mr. Titmouse, whom he instantly perceived to be melting
rapidly.

"Why, sir," quoth Titmouse, with a mixture of embarrassment and alarm,
"if I thought you all meant the correct thing--hem! I say, the _correct_
thing by me--I shouldn't so much mind a little disappointment for the
time; but you must own, Mr. Gammon, it is very hard being kept out of
one's own so long--honor, now! isn't it?"

"True, very true, Mr. Titmouse. Very hard it is, indeed, to bear, and we
all felt deeply for you, and would have set everything in train"----

"_Would have!_ oh my stars!"----

"Yes, my dear Mr. Titmouse, we _would_ have done it, and believed we
could have brought you through every difficulty--over every obstacle,
prodigious though they are, and almost innumerable."

"Why--you--don't--hardly--quite--mean to say you've given it all
up?--What, already! 'Pon my life! Oh Lord!" exclaimed Titmouse, in
evident trepidation.

Mr. Gammon had triumphed over Mr. Titmouse! whom, nothing loath, he
brought back, in two minutes' time, into the room which Titmouse had
just before so insolently quitted. Mr. Quirk and Mr. Snap had now
_their_ parts to perform in the little scene which they had determined
on enacting. They were in the act of locking up desks and drawers,
evidently on the move, and received Mr. Titmouse with an air of cold
surprise.

"Mr. Titmouse again!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, taking his gloves out of his
hat. "Back again!--This, sir, is quite an unexpected honor!"

"Leave anything behind?" inquired Mr. Snap, affecting to look about
him--"don't _see_ anything"----

"Oh no, sir! No, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse, with eager anxiety. "This
gent, Mr. Gammon, and I, have made it all up, gents! I'm not angry any
more--not the least, 'pon my soul I'm not--and quite forgive you--and no
mistake!"

"_Angry!_--_Forgive!!_ Mr. Titmouse!" echoed Mr. Quirk, with an air
sternly ironical. "We are under great obligations to you for your
forbearance!"

"Oh, come, gents!" said Titmouse, more and more disturbed, "I _was_ too
warm, I dare say, and--and--I ask your pardon, all of you, gents! I
won't say another word if you'll but buckle to business again--quite
exactly in your own way--because you see"----

"It's growing _very_ late," said Mr. Quirk, coldly, and looking at his
watch; "however, after what you have said, probably at some future time,
when we've _leisure_ to look into the thing"----

Poor Titmouse was near dropping on his knees, in mingled agony and
fright.

"May I be allowed to say," interposed the bland voice of Mr. Gammon,
anxiously addressing himself to Mr. Quirk, "that Mr. Titmouse a few
minutes ago assured me, outside there, that if you, as the head of the
firm, could only be persuaded to permit our house to take up his case
again"----

"I did--I did indeed, gents! so help me----!" interrupted Mr. Titmouse,
eagerly backing with an oath the ready lie of Mr. Gammon.

Mr. Quirk, with a stern countenance, drew his hand across his chin
musingly, and stood silently for a few moments, apparently irresolute.

"Well," said he at length, but very coldly, "since that is so, probably
we may be induced to resume our heavy labors in your behalf; and if you
will favor us with a call to-morrow night, at the same hour, we may
have, by that time, made up our minds as to the course we shall think
fit to adopt."

"Lord, sir, I'll be here as the clock strikes, and as meek as a mouse;
and pray, have it all your own way for the future, gents--do!"--cried
Titmouse, clasping his hands together on his breast.

"Good-night, sir--good-night!" exclaimed the partners,
stiffly--motioning him towards the door.

"Good-night, gents!" said Titmouse, bowing very low, and feeling himself
at the same time being--bowed _out_! As he passed out of the room, he
cast a lingering look at their three frigid faces, as if they were
angels sternly shutting him out from Paradise. What misery was his, as
he walked slowly homeward, with much the same feelings (now that the
fumes of the brandy had somewhat evaporated, and the reaction of
excitement was coming on, aggravated by a recollection of the desperate
check he had received) as those of a sick and troubled man, who,
suddenly roused out of a delicious dream, drops into wretched reality,
as it were out of a fairyland, which, with all its dear innumerable
delights, is melting overhead into thin air--disappearing, _forever_!

Closet Court had never looked so odious to him as it did on his return
from this memorable interview. Dreadfully distressed and harassed, he
flung himself on his bed for a moment, directly he had shut his door,
intending presently to rise and undress; but Sleep, having got him
prostrate, secured her victory. She waved her black wand over him,
and--he awoke not completely till about eight o'clock in the morning. A
second long-drawn sigh was preparing to follow its predecessor, when he
heard the clock strike eight, and sprang off the bed in a fright; for he
ought to have been at the shop an hour before. Dashing a little water
into his face, and scarce staying to wipe it off, he ran down-stairs,
through the court, and along the street, never stopping till he had
found his way into--almost the very arms of the dreaded Mr. Tag-rag;
who, rarely making his appearance till about half-past nine, had, as the
deuce would have it, happened to come down an hour and a half earlier
than usual on that particular morning, the only one out of several
hundreds on which Titmouse had been more than ten minutes beyond his
time.

"Yours ve-ry respectfully, Mr. Titmouse--Thomas Tag-rag!" exclaimed that
personage, with mock solemnity, bowing formally to his astounded and
breathless shopman.

"I--I--beg your pardon, sir; but I wasn't very well, and overslept
myself," stammered Titmouse.

"Ne-ver mind, Mr. Titmouse! ne-ver mind!--it don't much signify, as it
happens," interrupted Mr. Tag-rag, bitterly; "you've just got an hour
and a half to take this piece of silk, with my compliments, to Messrs.
Shuttle and Weaver, in Dirt Street, Spitalfields, and ask them if they
aren't ashamed to send it to a West-end house like mine; and bring back
a better piece instead of it! D' ye _hear_, sir?"

"Yes, sir--but--am I to go before my breakfast, sir?"

"Did I say a word about breakfast, sir? You heard my orders, sir; you
can attend to them or not, Mr. Titmouse, as you please!"

Off trotted Titmouse _instanter_, without his breakfast; and so Tag-rag
gained one object he had had in view. Titmouse found this rather trying:
a four-mile walk before him, with no inconsiderable load under his arm;
having, moreover, had nothing to eat since the preceding evening, when
he had partaken of a delicate repast of thick slices of bread, smeared
slightly over with somewhat high-flavored salt butter, and moistened
with a most astringent decoction of _quasi_ tea-leaves sweetened with
brown sugar, and discolored with sky-blue milk. He had not even a
farthing about him wherewith to buy a penny roll! As he went
disconsolately along, so many doubts and fears buzzed impetuously about
him, that they completely darkened his little soul, and bewildered his
petty understanding. _Ten Thousand a-Year!_--it could never be meant for
the like of _him_! He soon worked himself into a conviction that the
whole thing was infinitely too good to be true; the affair was
desperate; it had been all moonshine; for some cunning purpose or
another, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, had been--ah, here he was
within a few yards of their residence, the scene of last night's tragic
transactions! As he passed Saffron Hill, he paused, looked up towards
the blessed abode,

    "Where centred all his hopes and fears,"--

uttered a profound sigh, and passed slowly on towards Smithfield. The
words "_Quirk, Gammon, and Snap_," seemed to be written over every
shop-window which he passed--their images filled his mind's eye. What
could they be at? They had been all very polite and friendly at
first--and of their own seeking: but he had affronted them. How coldly
and proudly they had parted with him over-night, although they had
professed themselves reconciled to him! It was evident that they would
stand no nonsense--they were great lawyers; so he must (if they really
would allow him to see them again) eat humble pie cheerfully till he had
got all that they had to give him. How he dreaded the coming night!
Perhaps they intended civilly to tell him that, since seeing him, they
would have nothing more to do with him; they would get the estate for
themselves, or some one else who would be more manageable! They had
taken care to tell him nothing at all about the nature of his
pretensions to this grand fortune. Oh, how crafty they were--they had
it all their own way!--But what, after all, had he really done? The
estates were his, if they were really in earnest--his and no one's else;
and why should he be kept out of them at their will and pleasure?
Suppose he were to say he would give them all he was entitled to for
£20,000 down, in cash? Oh no; on second thoughts, that would be only two
years' income! But on the other hand--he dared hardly even propose it to
his thoughts--still, suppose it _should_ really all turn out true!
Goodness gracious!--that day two months he might be riding about in his
carriage in the Parks, and poor devils looking on at _him_, as he now
looked on all those who now rode there. There he would be, holding up
his head with the best of them, instead of slaving as he was that
moment, carrying about that cursed bundle--ough! how he shrunk with
disgust as he changed its position, to relieve his aching right arm! Why
was his mouth to be stopped--why might he not tell his shopmates? What
would he not give for the luxury of telling it to the odious Tag-rag? If
he _were_ to do so, Mr. Tag-rag, he was sure, would ask him to dinner
the very next Sunday, at his country house at Clapham!--Ah,
ha!--Thoughts such as these so occupied his mind, that he did not for a
long while observe that he was walking at a rapid rate towards the
Mile-end road, having left Whitechapel church nearly half a mile behind
him! The possible master of £10,000 a-year was nearly dropping with
fatigue, and sudden apprehension of the storm he should have to
encounter when he first saw Mr. Tag-rag after so unduly prolonged an
absence on his errand. He was detained for a cruel length of time at
Messrs. Shuttle and Weaver's; who, not having the exact kind of silk
required by their imperious customer at that moment on their premises,
had some difficulty in obtaining it, after having sent for it to one or
two neighboring manufactories; by which means it came to pass that it
was two o'clock before Titmouse, completely exhausted, had returned to
Tag-rag and Company's. The gentlemen of the shop had finished their
dinners.

"Go up-stairs and get your dinner, sir!" exclaimed Tag-rag, sternly,
after having received Messrs. Shuttle and Weaver's obsequious message of
apologies and hopes.

Titmouse having laid down his heavy bundle on the counter, went
up-stairs hungry enough, and found himself the sole occupant of the long
close-smelling room in which his companions had been recently dining.
His dinner was presently brought to him by a slatternly slipshod
servant-girl. It was in an uncovered basin, which appeared to contain
nothing but the leavings of his companions--a savory intermixture of
cold potatoes, broken meat, (chiefly bits of fat and gristle,) a little
hot water having been thrown over it to make it appear warm and
fresh--(faugh!) His plate (with a small pinch of salt upon it) had not
been cleaned after its recent use, but evidently only hastily smeared
over with a greasy towel, as also seemed his knife and fork, which, in
their disgusting state, he was fain to put up with--the table-cloth on
which he might have wiped them, having been removed. A hunch of bread
that seemed to have been tossing about in the pan for days, and half a
pint of turbid table-beer, completed the fare set before him; opposite
which he sat for some minutes, too much occupied with his reflections to
commence his repast. He was in the act of scooping out of the basin some
of its inviting contents, when--"Titmouse!" exclaimed the voice of one
of his shopmates, peering in at him through the half-opened door, "Mr.
Tag-rag wants you! He says you've had plenty of time to finish your
dinner!"

"Oh, tell him, then, I'm only just beginning my dinner--eugh! such as it
is," replied Titmouse, sulkily.

In a few minutes' time Mr. Tag-rag himself entered the room, stuttering
with fury--"How much longer, sir, may it be your pleasure to spend over
your dinner, eh?"

"Not another moment, sir," answered Titmouse, looking with unaffected
loathing and disgust at the savory victuals before him; "if you'll only
allow me a few minutes to go home and buy a penny roll instead of all
this"----

"Ve--ry good, sir! Ve--ry parti--cu--larly good, Mr. Titmouse," replied
Tag-rag, with ill-subdued rage; "anything else that I can make a
_leetle_ memorandum of--against the day of--your leaving us?"

This hint of twofold terror, _i. e._ of withholding on the ground of
misconduct the wretched balance of salary which might be then due to
him, and of also giving him a damning character--dispelled the small
remains of Titmouse's appetite, and he rose to return to the shop,
involuntarily clutching his fist as he brushed close past the tyrant
Tag-rag on the stairs, whom he would have been delighted to pitch down
head-foremost. If he _had_ done so, none of his fellow-slaves below, in
spite of their present sycophancy towards Tag-rag, would have shown any
particular alacrity in picking up their common oppressor. Poor Tittlebat
resumed his old situation behind the counter; but how different his
present, from his former air and manner! With his pen occasionally
peeping pertly out of his bushy hair over his right ear, and his
yard-measure in his hand, no one, till the previous Monday morning, had
been more cheerful, smirking, and nimble than Tittlebat Titmouse: alas,
how chopfallen now! None of his companions could make him out, or guess
what was in the wind; so they very justly concluded that he had been
doing something dreadfully disgraceful, the extent of which was known to
Tag-rag and himself alone. Their jeers and banter were giving place to
cold distrustful looks, which were far more trying to bear. How he
longed to be able to burst upon their astounded minds with the pent-up
intelligence that was silently racking and splitting his little bosom!
But if he did--the terrible firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--Oh! the
very thought of them glued his lips together. There was _one_, however,
of whom he might surely make a confidant--the excellent Huckaback, with
whom he had had no opportunity of communicating since Sunday night. That
gentleman was as close a prisoner at the establishment of DIAPER and
SARSENET, in Tottenham-court Road, as Titmouse at Messrs. Tag-rag's, of
which said establishment he was, by the way, quite as great an ornament
as Titmouse of Messrs. Tag-rag's. They were of about the same height,
and equals in vulgar puppyism of manners, dress, and appearance; but
Titmouse was certainly the better-looking. With equal conceit apparent
in their faces, that of Huckaback, square, flat, and sallow, had an
expression of ineffable impudence, made a lady shudder, and a gentleman
feel a tingling sensation in his right toe. About his small black eyes
there was a glimmer of low cunning;--but he is not of sufficient
importance to be painted any further. When Titmouse left the shop that
night, a little after nine, he hurried to his lodgings, to make himself
as imposing in his appearance before Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, as
his time and means would admit of. Behold, on a table lay a letter from
Huckaback. It was written in a flourishing mercantile hand; and here is
a _verbatim_ copy of it:


     "DEAR TIT,

     "Hope you are well, which is what I can only middling say in
     respect of me. Such a row with my governors as I have had to-day! I
     thought that as I had been in the House near upon Eighteen Months
     at £25 per annum, I might nat'rally ask for £30 a-year (which is
     what my Predecessor had) when, would you believe it, Mr. Sharpeye
     (who is going to be taken in as a Partner,) to whom I named the
     thing, ris up in rage against me, and I were had up into the
     counting-house, where both the governors was, and they gave it me
     in such a way that you never saw nor heard of; but it wasn't all on
     their own side, as you know me too well to think of. You would have
     thought I had been a-going to rob the house. They said I was most
     oudacious, and all that, and ungrateful, and what would I have
     next? Mr. Diaper said times was come to such a pitch!! since when
     he was first in the business, for salaries, says he, is ris to
     double, and not half the work done that was, and no
     gratitude--(cursed old curmudgeon!) He said if I left them just
     now, I might whistle for a character, except one that I should not
     like; but if he don't mind I'll give him a touch of law about
     that--which brings me to what happened to-day with _our_ lawyers,
     Titty, the people at Saffron Hill, whom I thought I would call in
     on to-day, being near the neighborhood with some light goods, to
     see how affairs was getting on, and stir them up a bit"--

This almost took Titmouse's breath away----

     --"feeling most _interested_ on your account, as you know, dear
     Tit, I do. I said I wanted to speak to one of the gentlemen on
     business of wital importance; whereat I was quickly shown into a
     room where two gents was sitting. Having put down my parcel for a
     minute on the table, I said I was a very partic'lar friend of
     yours, and had called in to see how things went on about the
     advertisement; whereat you never saw in your life how struck they
     looked, and stared at one another in speechless silence, till they
     said to me, what concerned me about the business? or something of
     that nature, but in such a way that _ris_ a _rage_ in me directly,
     all for your sake, (for I did not like the looks of things;) and
     says I, I said, we would let them know we were not to be
     _gammoned_; whereat up rose the youngest of the two, and ringing
     the bell, he says to a tight-laced young gentleman with a pen
     behind his ear, 'Show this fellow to the door,' which I was at
     once; but, in doing so, let out a little of my mind to them.
     They're no better than they should be, you see if they are; but
     when we touch the property, we'll show them who is their masters,
     which consoles me. Good-by, keep your sperrits up, and I will call
     and tell you more about it on Sunday. So farewell (I write this at
     Mr. Sharpeye's desk, who is coming down from dinner directly, the
     beast!)--Your true friend,
                                                        "R. HUCKABACK.

     "P. S.--Met a young Jew last night with a lot of prime cigars, and
     (knowing he _must_ have stole them--betwixt you, and I, and the
     Post--they looked so good at the price,) I bought one shilling's
     worth for me, and two shillings' worth for you, your salary being
     higher, and to say nothing of your chances."

All that part of the foregoing letter which related to its gifted
writer's interview with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, Titmouse read
in a kind of spasm--he could not draw a breath, and felt a choking
sensation coming over him. After a while, "I may spare myself," thought
he, "the trouble of rigging out--Huckaback has done my business for me
with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap!--Mine will only be a walk in
vain!" And this cursed call of Huckaback's, too, to have happened after
what had occurred last night between Titmouse and them!! and so urgently
as he had been enjoined to keep the matter to himself! Of course,
Huckaback would seem to have been sent by him; seeing he appeared to
have assumed the hectoring tone which Titmouse had tried so vainly
over-night, and now so bitterly repented of; and he had no doubt grossly
insulted the arbiters of Titmouse's destiny, (for he knew Huckaback's
impudence)--he had even said that he (Titmouse) would not be GAMMONED by
them! But time was pressing--the experiment must be made; and with a
beating heart he scrambled into a change of clothes--bottling up his
wrath against the unconscious Huckaback till he should see that worthy.
In a miserable state of mind he set off soon after for Saffron Hill at a
quick pace, which soon became a trot, and often sharpened into a
downright run. He saw, heard, and thought of nothing, as he hurried
along Oxford Street and Holborn, but Quirk, Gammon, Snap, and Huckaback,
and the reception which the last-mentioned gentleman might have secured
for him--if, indeed, he was to be received at all. The magical words,
_Ten Thousand a-year_, had not disappeared from the field of his
troubled vision; but how faintly and dimly they shone!--like the
Pleiades coldly glistening through intervening mists far off--oh! at
what a stupendous, immeasurable, and hopeless distance! Imagine those
stars gazed at by the anguished and despairing eyes of the bereaved
lover, madly believing one of them to contain HER who has just departed
from his arms, and from this world, and you may form a notion of the
agonizing feelings--the absorbed contemplation of one dear, dazzling,
but distant object, experienced on this occasion by Mr. Titmouse. No,
no; I don't mean seriously to pretend that so grand a thought as this
_could_ be entertained by his little optics intellectual; you might as
well suppose the tiny eye of a black beetle to be scanning the vague,
fanciful, and mysterious figure and proportions of Orion, or a kangaroo
to be perusing and pondering over the immortal _Principia_. I repeat,
that I have no desire of the sort, and am determined not again foolishly
to attempt fine writing, which I now perceive to be entirely out of my
line. In language more befitting me and my subject, I may be allowed to
say that there is no getting the contents of a quart into a pint pot;
that Titmouse's mind was a half-pint--and it was brim-full. All the
while that I have been going on thus, however, Titmouse was hurrying
down Holborn at a rattling rate. When at length he had reached Saffron
Hill, he was in a bath of perspiration. His face was quite red; he
breathed hard; his heart beat violently; he had got a stitch in his
side; and he could not get his gloves on his hot and swollen hands. He
stood for a moment with his hat off, wiping his reeking forehead, and
endeavoring to recover himself a little, before entering the dreaded
presence to which he had been hastening. He even fancied for a moment
that his eyes gave out sparks of light. While thus pausing, St. Andrew's
Church struck ten, half electrifying Titmouse, who bolted up Saffron
Hill, and was soon standing opposite the door. How the sight of it smote
him, as it reminded him of the way in which, on the preceding night, he
had bounced out of it! But that could not now be helped; so _ring_ went
the bell; as softly, however, as he could; for he recollected that it
was a very loud bell, and he did not wish to offend. He stood for some
time, and nobody answered. He waited for nearly two minutes, and
trembled, assailed by a thousand vague fears. He might not, however,
have rung loudly enough--so--again, a little louder, did he venture to
ring. Again he waited. There seemed something threatening in the great
brass plate on the door, out of which "QUIRK, GAMMON, AND SNAP" appeared
to look at him ominously. While he thought of it, by the way, there was
something very serious and stern in all their faces--he wondered that he
had not noticed it before. What a drunken beast he had been to go on in
their presence as he had! thought he; then Huckaback's image flitted
across his disturbed fancy. "Ah!" thought he, "that's the thing!--that's
it, depend upon it: this door will never be opened to _me_ again--he's
done for me!" He breathed faster, clinched his fist, and involuntarily
raised it in a menacing way, when he heard himself addressed--"Oh! dear
me, sir, I _hope_ I haven't kept you waiting," said the old woman whom
he had before seen, fumbling in her pocket for the door-key. She had
been evidently out shopping, having a plate in her left hand, over which
her apron was partially thrown. "Hope you've not been ringing long,
sir!"

"Oh dear! no ma'am," replied Titmouse, with anxious civility, and a
truly miserable smile--"Afraid I may have kept _them_ waiting," he
added, almost dreading to hear the answer.

"Oh no, sir, not at all--they've all been gone since a little after
nine; but there's a letter I was to give you!" She opened the door;
Titmouse nearly dropping with fright. "I'll get it for you, sir--let me
see, where did I put it?--Oh, in the clerk's room, I think." Titmouse
followed her in. "Dear me--where can it be?" she continued, peering
about, and then snuffing the long wick of the candle, which she had left
burning for the last quarter of an hour, during her absence. "I _hope_
none of the clerks has put it away in mistake! Well, it isn't _here_,
anyhow."

"Perhaps, ma'am, it's in their _own_ room," suggested Titmouse, in a
faint tone.

"Oh, p'r'aps it is!" she replied. "We'll go and see"--and she led the
way, followed closely by Titmouse, who caught his breath spasmodically
as he passed the green-baize door. Yes, there was the room--the scene of
last night was transacted there, and came crowding over his
recollection--there was the green-shaded candlestick--the table covered
with papers--an arm-chair near it, in which, probably, Mr. Quirk had
been sitting only an hour before to write the letter they were now in
quest of, and which might be to forbid him their presence forever! How
dreary and deserted the room looked, thought he as he peered about it in
search of the dreaded letter!

"Oh, here it is!--well, I never!--who could have put it here, now? I'm
sure I didn't. Let me see--it was, no doubt"--said the old woman,
holding the letter in one hand and putting the other to her head.

"Never mind, ma'am," said Titmouse, stretching his hand towards
her--"now we've got it, it don't much signify." She gave it to him.
"Seem _particularly_ anxious for me to get it--did they, ma'am?" he
inquired, with a strong effort to appear unconcerned--the dreaded letter
quite quivering, the while, in his fingers.

"No, sir--Mr. Quirk only said I was to give it you when you called.
B'lieve they sent it to you, but the clerk said he couldn't find your
place out; by the way, (excuse me, sir,) but yours _is_ a funny name!
How I heard 'em laughing at it, to be sure! What makes people give such
queer names? Would you like to read it here, sir?--you're welcome."

"No, thank you, ma'am--it's of not the _least_ consequence," he replied,
with a desperate air; and tossing it with attempted carelessness into
his hat, which he put on his head, he very civilly wished her
good-night, and departed--very nearly inclined to sickness, or
faintness, or something of the sort, which the fresh air might perhaps
dispel. He quickly espied a lamp at a corner, which promised to afford
him an uninterrupted opportunity of inspecting his letter. He took it
out of his hat. It was addressed--simply, "Mr. Titmouse, _Cocking_
Court, Oxford Street," (which accounted, perhaps, for the clerk's having
been unable to find it;) and having been opened with trembling
eagerness, thus it read:--

     "Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, present their compliments to Mr.
     Titmouse, and are anxious to save him the trouble of his intended
     visit this evening.

     "They exceedingly regret that obstacles (which it is to be hoped,
     however, may not prove _ultimately_ insurmountable) exist in the
     way of their prosecuting their intended inquiries on behalf of Mr.
     Titmouse.

     "Since their last night's interview with him, circumstances, which
     they could not have foreseen, and over which they have no control,
     have occurred, which render it unnecessary for Mr. T. to give
     himself any more anxiety in the affair--at least, not until he
     shall have heard from Messrs. Q. G. and S.

     "If anything of importance _should_ hereafter transpire, it is not
     improbable that Mr. T. may hear from them.

     "They were favored, this afternoon, with a visit from Mr. T.'s
     friend--a Mr. Hucklebottom."

     "_Saffron Hill, Wednesday Evening, 12th July 18--._"

When poor Titmouse had finished reading over this vague, frigid, and
disheartening note a second time, a convulsive sob or two pierced his
bosom, indicative of its being indeed swollen with sorrow; and at
length, overcome by his feelings, he cried bitterly--not checked even by
the occasional exclamations of one or two passers-by. He could not at
all control himself. He felt as if he could have almost relieved
himself, by banging his head against the wall! A tumultuous feeling of
mingled grief and despair prevented his thoughts, for a long while, from
settling on any one idea or object. At length, when the violence of the
storm had somewhat abated, on concluding a third perusal of the
death-warrant to all his hopes, which he held in his hand, his eye lit
upon the strange word which was intended to designate his friend
Huckaback; and it instantly changed both the kind of his feelings, and
the current in which they had been rushing. Grief became rage; and the
stream foamed in quite a new direction--namely, towards Huckaback. That
accursed fellow he considered to be the sole cause of the direful
disaster which had befallen him. He utterly lost sight of one
circumstance, which one might have imagined likely to have occurred to
his thoughts at such a time--viz. his own offensive and insolent
behavior over-night to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. Yet so it
was:--yes, upon the devoted (but unconscious) head of Huckaback, was the
lightning rage of Tittlebat Titmouse doomed to descend. The fire that
was thus quickly kindled within, soon dried up the source of his tears.
He crammed the letter into his pocket, and started off at once in the
direction of Leicester Square, breathing rage at every step--_viresque
acquirens eundo_. His hands kept convulsively clinching together as he
pelted along. Hotter and hotter became his rage as he neared the
residence of Huckaback. When he had reached it, he sprang up-stairs;
knocked at his _quondam_ friend's door; and on the instant of its
being--doubtless somewhat surprisedly--opened by Huckaback, who was
undressing, Titmouse sprang towards him, let fly a goodly number of
violent blows upon his face and breast--and down fell Huckaback upon the
bed behind him, insensible, and bleeding profusely from his nose.

"There! there!"--gasped Titmouse, breathless and exhausted, discharging
a volley of oaths and opprobrious epithets at the victim of his fury.
"Do it again! You will, won't you? _You'll_ go--and meddle again in
other people's--you---- cu-cu-cursed officious"--but his rage was
spent--the paroxysm was over; the silent and bleeding figure of
Huckaback was before his eyes; and he gazed at him, terror-stricken.
What had he done! He sank down on the bed beside Huckaback--then started
up, wringing his hands, and staring at him in an ecstasy of remorse and
fright. It was rather singular that the noise of such an assault should
have roused no one to inquire into it; but so it was. Frightened almost
out of his bewildered senses, he closed and bolted the door; and
addressed himself, as well as he was able, to the recovering of
Huckaback. After propping him up, and splashing cold water into his
face, Titmouse at length discovered symptoms of restoration to
consciousness, which he anxiously endeavored to accelerate, by putting
to the lips of the slowly-reviving victim of his violence some cold
water, in a tea-cup. He swallowed a little; and soon afterwards, opening
his eyes, stared on Titmouse with a dull eye and bewildered air.

"What's been the matter?" at length he faintly inquired.

"Oh, Hucky! so glad to hear you speak again. It's I--I--Titty! I did it!
Strike me, Hucky, as soon as you're well enough! Do--kick me--anything
you choose! I won't hinder you!" cried Titmouse, sinking on his knees,
and clasping his hands together, as he perceived Huckaback rapidly
reviving.

"Why, what _is_ the matter?" repeated that gentleman, with a wondering
air, raising his hand to his nose, from which the blood was still
trickling. The fact is, that he had lost his senses, probably from the
suddenness, rather than the violence of the injuries which he had
received.

"I did it all--yes, I did!" continued Titmouse, gazing on him with a
look of agony and remorse.

"Why, I can't be awake--I can't!" said Huckaback, rubbing his eyes, and
then staring at his wet and blood-stained shirt-front and hands.

"Oh yes, you are--you are!" groaned Titmouse; "and I'm going _mad_ as
fast as I can! Do what you like to me! Kick me if you please! Call in a
constable! Send me to jail! Say I came to rob you--anything--blow me if
I care what becomes of me!"

"Why, what _does_ all this jabber mean, Titmouse?" inquired Huckaback,
sternly, and apparently meditating reprisals.

"Oh, yes, I see! Now you _are_ going to give it me! but I won't stir. So
hit away, Hucky."

"Why--are you mad?" inquired Huckaback, grasping him by the collar
rather roughly.

"Yes, quite! Mad!--ruined!--gone to the devil all at once!"

"And what if you are? What did it matter to _me_? What brought you
here?" continued Huckaback, in a tone of increasing vehemence. "What
have I done to offend you? How _dare_ you come _here_? And at this time
of night, too? Eh?"

"What, indeed! Oh lud, oh lud, oh lud! Kick me, I say--strike me! You'll
do me good, and bring me to my senses. _Me_ to do all this to you! And
we've been such precious good friends always. I'm a brute, Hucky--I've
been mad, stark mad, Hucky--and that's all I can say!"

Huckaback stared at him more and more; and began at length to suspect
how matters stood--namely, that the Sunday's incident had turned
Titmouse's head--he having also, no doubt, heard some desperate bad news
during the day, smashing all his hopes. A mixture of emotions kept
Huckaback silent.
Astonishment--apprehension--doubt--pride--pique--resentment. He had been
_struck_--his blood had been drawn--by the man there before him on his
knees, formerly his friend; now, he supposed, a madman.

"Why, curse me, Titmouse, if I can make up my mind what to do to you!"
he exclaimed, "I--I suppose you are going mad, or gone mad, and I must
forgive you. But get away with you--out with you, or--or--I'll call
in"----

"Forgive me--forgive me, dear Hucky! Don't send me away--I shall go and
drown myself if you do."

"What the d--l do I care if you do? You'd much better have gone and done
it before you came here. Nay, be off and do it _now_, instead of
blubbering here in this way."

"Go on! go on!--it's doing me good--the worse the better!" sobbed
Titmouse.

"Come, come," said Huckaback, roughly, "none of this noise here. I'm
tired of it!"

"But, pray, don't send me away from you. I shall go straight to the
devil if you do! I've no friend but you, Hucky. Yet I've been such a
villain to you!--But it quite put the devil into me, when all of a
sudden I found it was _you_."

"Me!--Why, what _are_ you after?" interrupted Huckaback, with an air of
angry wonder.

"Oh dear, dear!" groaned Titmouse; "if I've been a brute to you, which
is quite true, _you've_ been the _ruin_ of me, clean! I'm clean done
for, Huck. Cleaned out! You've done my business for me; knocked it all
on the head!--I sha'n't never hear any more of it--they've said as much
in their letter--they say you called to-day"----

Huckaback now began to have a glimmering notion of his having been, in
some considerable degree, connected with the mischief of the day--an
unconscious agent in it. He audibly drew in his breath, as it were, as
he more and more distinctly recollected his visit to Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap; and adverted more particularly to his _threats_,
uttered, too, in Titmouse's name, and as if by his authority. Whew! here
was a kettle of fish.

Now, strange and unaccountable as, at first thought, it may appear, the
very circumstance which one should have thought calculated to assuage
his resentment against Titmouse--namely, that he had really _injured_
Titmouse most seriously, (if not indeed irreparably,) and so _provoked_
the drubbing which had just been administered to him--had quite the
contrary effect. Paradoxical as it may seem, matter of clear mitigation
was at once converted into matter of aggravation. Were the feelings
which Huckaback then experienced, akin to that which often produces
hatred of a person whom one has injured? May it be thus accounted for?
That there is a secret satisfaction in the mere consciousness of being a
sufferer--a martyr--and that, too, in the presence of a person whom one
perceives to be aware that he has wantonly injured one; that one's
bruised spirit is soothed by the sight of his remorse--by the
consciousness that he is punishing himself infinitely more severely than
_we_ could punish him; and of the claim one has obtained to the
_sympathy_ of everybody who sees, or may hear of one's sufferings, (that
rich and grateful balm to injured feeling.) But when, as in the case of
Huckaback, feelings of this description (in a coarse and small way, to
be sure, according to his kind) were suddenly encountered by a
consciousness of his having _deserved_ his sufferings; when the martyr
felt himself quickly sinking into the culprit and offender; when, I say,
Huckaback felt an involuntary consciousness that the gross indignities
which Titmouse had just inflicted on him, had been justified by the
provocation--nay, had been far less than his mischievous and impudent
interference had deserved;--and when feelings of this sort, moreover,
were sharpened by a certain tingling sense of physical pain from the
blows which he had received--the result was, that the sleeping lion of
Huckaback's courage was very nearly awakening.

"_I've half a mind, Titmouse_"--said Huckaback, knitting his brows,
fixing his eyes, and appearing inclined to raise his arm. There was an
ominous pause for a moment or two, during which Titmouse's feelings also
underwent a slight alteration. His allusion to Huckaback's ruinous
insult to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, unconsciously converted his
remorse into rage, which it rather, perhaps, resuscitated. Titmouse rose
from his knees. "Ah!" said he, in quite an altered tone, "you _may_ look
fierce! you may!--you'd better strike me, Huckaback--do! Finish the
mischief you've begun this day! Hit away--you're quite safe"--and he
secretly prepared himself for the mischief which--did not come. "You
_have_ ruined me! you have, Huckaback!" he continued with increasing
vehemence; "and I shall be cutting my throat--nay," striking his fist on
the table, "I will!"

"You don't say so!" exclaimed Huckaback, apprehensively. "No, Titmouse,
don't--don't think of it; it will all come right yet, depend on't; you
see if it don't!"

"Oh, no, it's all done for--it's all up with me!"

"But _what's_ been done?--let us hear," said Huckaback, as he passed a
wet towel to and fro over his ensanguined features. It was by this time
clear that the storm which had for some time given out only a few faint
fitful flashes or flickerings in the distance, had passed away.
Titmouse, with many grievous sighs, took out the letter which had
produced the paroxysms I have been describing, and read it aloud. "And
only see how they've spelled your name, Huckaback--look!" he added,
handing his friend the letter.

"How _partic'lar_ vulgar!" exclaimed Huckaback, with a contemptuous air,
which, overspreading his features, half-closed as was his left eye, and
swollen as were his cheek and nose, would have made him a queer object
to one who had leisure to observe such matters. "And so _this_ is all
they say of _me_," he continued. "How do you come to know that I've been
doing you mischief? All I did was just to look in, as respectful as
possible, to ask how you was, and they very civilly told me you was very
well, and we parted"----

"Nay, now, that's a lie, Huckaback, and you know it!" interrupted
Titmouse.

"It's true, so help me----!" vehemently asseverated Huckaback.

"Why, perhaps you'll deny that you wrote and told me all you said,"
interrupted Titmouse, indignantly, feeling in his pocket for Huckaback's
letter, which that worthy had at the moment quite forgotten having sent,
and on being reminded of it, he certainly seemed rather nonplussed.
"Oh--ay, if you mean _that_--hem!"--he stammered.

"Come, you _know_ you're a liar, Huck--but it's no good now: liar or no
liar, it's all over."

"The pot and kettle, anyhow, Tit, as far as that goes--hem!--but let's
spell over this letter; we haven't studied it yet; I'm a hand, rather,
at getting at what's said in a letter!--Come"--and they drew their
chairs together, Huckaback reading over the letter slowly, alone;
Titmouse's eyes travelling incessantly from his friend's countenance to
the letter, and so back again, to gather what might be the effect of its
perusal.

"There's a glimpse of daylight yet, Titty!" said Huckaback, as he
concluded reading it.

"No! But is there really? Do tell me, Hucky"----

"Why, first and foremost, how uncommon polite they are, (except that
they haven't manners enough to spell my name right)"----

"Really--and so they are!" exclaimed Titmouse, rather elatedly.

"And then, you see, there's another thing--if they'd meant to give the
thing the go-by altogether, what could have been easier than to say
so?--but they haven't said anything of the sort, so they don't _mean_ to
give it all up!"

"Lord, Huck! what would I give for such a head as yours! What you say is
quite true," said Titmouse, still more cheerfully.

"To be sure, they do say there's an _obstacle_--an obstacle, you
see--nay, it's obstacles, which is several, and that"---- Titmouse's
face fell.

"But they say again, that it's--it's--curse their big words--they say
it's--to be got over in time."

"Well--that's something, isn't it?"

"To be sure it is; and a'n't anything better than nothing? But then,
again, here's a stone in the other pocket--they say there's a
_circumstance_!--don't you hate circumstances, Titty?--I do."

"So do I!--What does it mean? I've often heard--isn't it a _thing_? And
that may be--anything."

"Oh, there's a great dif--hem! And they go on to say it's happened since
you was there"----

"Curse me, then, if that don't mean _you_, Huckaback!" interrupted
Titmouse, with returning anger.

"No, that can't be it; they said they'd no control over the
circumstance;--now they _had_ over me; for they ordered me to the door,
and I went; a'n't that so, Titty?--Lord, how my eye _does_ smart, to be
sure!"

"And don't I smart all over, inside and out, if it comes to that?"
inquired Titmouse, dolefully.

"There's nothing particular in the rest of the letter--only uncommon
civil, and saying if anything turns up you shall hear."

"_I_ could make that out myself--so there's nothing in that"--said
Titmouse, quickly.

"Well--if it _is_ all over--what a pity! Such things as we could have
done, Titty, if we'd got the thing--eh?"

Titmouse groaned at this glimpse of the heaven he seemed shut out of
forever.

"Can't you find anything--nothing at all comfortable-like, in the
letter?" he inquired with a deep sigh.

Huckaback again took up the letter and spelled it over.

"Well," said he, striving to give himself an appearance of thinking,
"there's something in it that, after all, I don't seem quite to get to
the bottom of--they've seemingly taken a deal of pains with it!"

[And undoubtedly it _was_ a document which had been pretty well
considered by its framers before being sent out; though, probably, they
had hardly anticipated its being so soon afterwards subjected to the
scrutiny of such acute intellects as were now engaged upon it.]

"And then, again, you know they're lawyers; and do _they_ ever write
anything that hasn't got more in it than anybody can find out? These
gents that wrote this, they're a trick too keen for the thieves
even--and how can _we_--hem!--but I wonder if that fat, old, bald-headed
gent, with sharp eyes, was Mr. Quirk"----

"To be sure it was," interrupted Titmouse, with a half shudder.

"Was it? Well, then, I'd advise Old Nick to look sharp before he tackles
that old gent, that's all!"

"Give me Mr. Gammon for my money," said Titmouse, sighing, "such an
_uncommon_ gentlemanlike gent--he's quite taken to me"----

"Ah, that, I suppose, was him with the black velvet waistcoat, and
pretty white hands! But _he_ can look stern, too, Tit! You should have
seen him ring, when--hem!--But what was I saying about the letter? Don't
you see they say they'll be sure to write if anything turns up?"

"So they do, to be sure! Well--I'd forgot that!" interrupted Titmouse,
brightening up.

"Then, isn't there their advertisement in the _Flash_? They hadn't their
eye on anything when they put it there, I dare say!--They can't get out
of _that_, anyhow!"

"I begin to feel all of a sweat, Hucky; I'm sure there's something in
the wind yet!" said Titmouse, drawing nearer still to his comforter.
"And more than that--would they have said half they did to me last
night"----

"Eh! hollo, by the way! I've not heard of what went on last night! So
you went to 'em? Well--tell us all that happened--and nothing but the
truth, be _sure_ you don't; come, Titty!" said Huckaback, snuffing the
candle, and then turning eagerly to his companion.

"Well--they'd such a number of queer-looking papers before them, some
with old German-text writing, and others with zigzag marks--and they
were so uncommon polite--they all three got up as I went in, and made me
bows, one after the other, and said, 'Yours most obediently, Mr.
Titmouse,' and a great many more such things."

"Well--and then?"

"Why, Hucky, so help me----! and 'pon my soul, that old gent, Mr. Quirk,
told me"--Titmouse's voice trembled at the recollection--"he says, 'Sir,
you're the real owner of Ten Thousand a-year, and no mistake!'"

"Lawks!" ejaculated Huckaback, opening wider and wider his eyes and ears
as his friend went on.

"'And a title--a _lord_, or something of that sort--and you've a great
many country seats; and there's been £10,000 a-year saving up for you
ever since you was born--and heaps of interest besides!'--'pon my soul
he did!"

"Lord, Tit! you take my breath away," gasped Huckaback, his eyes fixed
intently on his friend's face.

"Yes; and they said I might marry the most beautifulest woman that ever
my eyes saw, for the asking."

"You'll forget poor Bob Huckaback, Tit!" murmured his friend,
despondingly.

"Not I, Huckaback--if I get my rights, and you know how to behave
yourself!"

"Have you been to Tag-rag's to-day, after hearing all this?"

[The thermometer seemed to have been here plunged out of hot water into
cold--Titmouse was down at zero in a trice.]

"Oh!--that's it! 'Tis all gone again! What a fool I am! We've clean
forgot this cursed letter--and that leads me to the end of what took
place last night. That cursed shop was what we split on!"

"Split on _the shop_! eh? What's the meaning of that?" inquired
Huckaback, with eager anxiety.

"Why, that's the thing," continued Titmouse, in a faltering tone, and
with a depressed look--"That was what I wanted to know myself; for they
said I'd better go back!! So I said, 'Gents,' said I, 'I'll be---- if
I'll go back to the shop any more;' and I snapped my fingers at
them--so! (for you know what a chap I am when my blood's up.) And they
all turned gashly pale--they did, upon my life--you never saw anything
like it! And one of them said then, in a humble way, 'Wouldn't I please
to go back to the shop, just for a day or two, till things is got to
rights a bit.' 'Not a day nor a minute!' says I, in an immense rage. 'We
think you'd better, really,' said they. 'Then,' says I, 'if that's your
plan, curse me if I won't cut with you all, and I'll employ some one
else!' and--would you believe me?--out I went, bang! into the street!!"

"You _did_, Tit!!" echoed Huckaback, aghast.

"They shouldn't have given me so much brandy and water as they did; I
didn't well know what I was about, what with the news and the spirits!"

"And you went into the street?" inquired Huckaback, with a kind of
horror.

"I did, by Jove, Hucky!"

"They'd given you the sperrits to see what kind of chap you'd be if you
got the property--only to try you, depend on it!"

"Lord! I--I dare say they did!" exclaimed Titmouse, elevating his head
with sudden amazement, totally forgetting that same brandy and water he
had asked for--"and me never to think of it at the time."

"Now are you quite sure you wasn't in a _dream_ last night, all the
while?"

"Oh, dear, I wish I had been--I do, indeed, Hucky!"

"Well--you went into the street--what then?" inquired Huckaback, with a
sigh of exhausted attention.

"Why, when I'd got there, I could have bitten my tongue off, as one may
suppose; but, just as I was a-turning to go in again, who should come up
to me but Mr. Gammon, saying, he humbly hoped there was no offence."

"Oh, glorious! So it was all set right again, then--eh?"

"Why--I--I can't quite exactly say that much, either--but--when I went
back, (being obligated by Mr. Gammon being so pressing,) the other two
was sitting as pale as death; and though Mr. Gammon and me went on our
knees to the old gent, it wasn't any use for a long time; and all that
he could be got to say was, that perhaps I might look in again
to-night--(but they first made me swear a solemn oath on the Bible never
to tell any one anything about the fortune)--and then--you went,
Huckaback, and you did the business; they of course concluding I'd sent
you!"

"Oh, bother! that can't be. Don't you see how civilly they speak of me
in their letter? They're afraid of me, you may depend on it. By the way,
Tit, how much did you promise to come down, if you got the thing?"

"_Come down!_--I--really--by Jove, I didn't think of such a thing!
No--I'm sure I didn't"--answered Titmouse, as if new light had burst in
upon him.

"Why, Tit, I never see'd such a goose! That's it, depend upon it--it's
the whole thing! That's what they're driving at, in the note!--Why, Tit,
where _was_ your wits? D' ye think such gents as them--great lawyers,
too--will work for nothing?--You must write at once and tell them you
will come down handsome--say a couple of hundreds, besides
expenses--Gad! 'twill set you on your pins again, Titty!--Rot me! now I
think of it, if I didn't dream last night that you was a Member of
Parliament or something of that sort."

"A member of Parliament! And so I shall, if all this turns up well--I
shall be _that_ at least!" replied Titmouse, exultingly.

"You see if my dream don't come true! You see, Titty, I'm _always_
a-thinking of you, day and night. Never was two fellows that was such
close friends as we was from the very beginning of knowing each other!"

[They had been acquainted with each other about half a year.]

"Hucky, what a cruel scamp I was to behave to you in the way I
did--curse me, if I couldn't cry to see your eye bunged up in that way!"

"Pho! dear Titty, I knew you loved me all the while"--whined Huckaback,
"and meant no harm; you wasn't yourself when you did it--and besides, I
deserved ten times more! If you had killed me I should have liked you as
much as ever!"

"Give us your hand, Hucky! Let's forgive one another!" cried Titmouse,
excitedly; and their hands were quickly locked together.

"If we don't mismanage the thing, we shall be all right yet, Titty; but
you won't do anything without speaking to _me_ first--will you, Titty?"

"The thoughts of it all going right again is enough to set me wild,
Hucky--But what shall we do to set the thing going again?"

"_Quarter past one!_" quivered the voice of the paralytic watchman
beneath, startling the friends out of their exciting colloquy; his
warning being at the same time silently seconded by the long-wicked
candle, burning within half an inch of its socket. They hastily agreed
that Titmouse should immediately write to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap, a proper [_i. e._ a most abject] letter, solemnly pledging himself
to obey their injunctions in everything for the future, and offering
them a handsome reward for their exertions, if successful.

"Well--good-night, Huck! good-night," said Titmouse, rising. "I'm not
the least sleepy--I sha'n't sleep a wink all night long! I shall sit up
to write my letter--you haven't got a sheet of paper here, by the
way?--I've used all mine." [That was, he had, some months before, bought
a sheet to write a letter, and had so used it.]

Huckaback produced a sheet, somewhat crumpled, from a drawer. "I'd give
a hundred if I had them!" said he; "I sha'n't care a straw for the
hiding I've got to-night--though I'm a _leetle_ sore after it, too--and
what the deuce am I to say to-morrow to Messrs. Diaper"----

"Oh, you can't hardly be at a loss for a lie that'll suit _them_,
surely!--So good-night, Hucky--good-night!"

Huckaback wrung his friend's hand, and was in a moment or two alone.
"Haven't my fingers been itching all the while to be at the fellow!"
exclaimed he, as he shut the door. "But, somehow, I've got too soft a
sperrit, and can't bear to hurt any one;--and then--if the chap gets his
£10,000 a-year--why--hem! Titty a'n't such a bad fellow, in the main,
after all."

If Titmouse had been many degrees higher in the grade of society, _he
would still have met with his Huckaback_;--a trifle more polished,
perhaps, but hardly more quick-sighted or effective than, in his way, had
been the vulgar being he had just quitted.

Titmouse hastened homeward. How it was he knew not; but the feelings of
elation with which he had quitted Huckaback did not last long; they
rapidly sank, in the cold night-air, lower and lower, the farther he got
from Leicester Square. He tried to recollect _what it was_ that had made
him take so very different a view of his affairs from that with which he
had entered Huckaback's room. He had still a vague impression that they
were not desperate; that Huckaback had told him so, _and somehow proved
it_; but how he now knew not--he could not recollect. As Huckaback had
gone on from time to time, Titmouse's little mind seemed to himself to
comprehend and appreciate what was being said, and to gather
encouragement from it; but _now_--consume it!--he stopped--rubbed his
forehead--what the deuce WAS it? By the time that he had reached his own
door, he felt in as deplorable and despairing a humor as ever. He sat
down to write his letter at once; but, after many vain efforts to
express his meaning--his feelings being not in the least degree relieved
by the many oaths he uttered--he at length furiously dashed his pen,
point-wise, upon the table, and thereby destroyed the only implement of
the sort which he possessed. Then he tore, rather than pulled off, his
clothes; blew out his candle with a furious _puff_; and threw himself on
his bed--but in so doing banged the back of his head against the back of
the bed--and which of the two suffered more, for some time after,
probably Mr. Titmouse was best able to tell.

Hath, then--oh, Titmouse! fated to undergo much!--the blind jade
Fortune, in her mad vagaries--she, the goddess whom thou hast so long
foolishly worshipped--at length cast her sportful eye upon thee, and
singled thee out to become the envy of millions of admiring fools, by
reason of the pranks she will presently make thee exhibit for her
amusement? If this be indeed, as at present it promises, her intent, she
truly, to me calmly watching her movements, appears resolved first to
wreak her spite upon thee to the uttermost, and make thee pass through
intense sufferings! Oh me! Oh me! Alas!




CHAPTER III.


The means by which Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, became possessed of
the important information which had put them into motion, as we have
seen, to find out by advertisement one yet unknown to them, it will not
be necessary for some time to explain. Theirs was a keen house, truly,
and dealing principally in the criminal line of business; and they would
not, one may be sure, have lightly committed themselves to their present
extent, namely, in inserting such an advertisement in the newspapers,
and, above all, going so far in their disclosures to Titmouse. Their
prudence in the latter step, however, was very questionable to
themselves even; and they immediately afterwards deplored together the
precipitation with which Mr. Quirk had communicated to Titmouse the
nature and extent of his possible good fortune. It was Mr. Quirk's own
doing, however, and done after as much expostulation as the cautious
Gammon could venture to use. I say they had not _lightly_ taken up the
affair; they had not "acted unadvisedly." They were fortified, first, by
the opinion of Mr. MORTMAIN, an able and experienced conveyancer, who
thus wound up an abstrusely learned opinion on the voluminous "case"
which had been submitted to him:--

     "...Under all these circumstances, and assuming as above, I am
     decidedly of opinion that the title to the estates in question is
     at this moment not in their present possessor, (who represents the
     younger branch of the Dreddlington family,) but in the descendants
     of Stephen Dreddlington, through the female line; which brings us
     to Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse. This person, however, seems not to
     have been at all aware of the existence of his rights, or he could
     hardly have been concerned in the pecuniary arrangements mentioned
     at fol. 33 of the case. Probably something may be heard of his heir
     by making careful inquiry in the neighborhood where he was last
     heard of, and issuing advertisements for his heir-at-law; care, of
     course, being taken not to be so specific in the terms of such
     advertisements as to attract the notice of A. B., (the party now in
     possession.) If such person should, by the means above suggested,
     be discovered, I advise proceedings to be commenced forthwith,
     under the advice of some gentleman of experience at the common-law
     bar.
                                                      "MOULDY MORTMAIN.
     "_Lincoln's Inn, January_ 19, 18--."

This was sufficiently gratifying to the "house;" but, to make assurance
doubly sure, before embarking in so harassing and expensive an
enterprise--one which lay a good deal, too, without the sphere of their
practice, which as already mentioned, was chiefly in criminal law--the
same _case_ (without Mr. Mortmain's opinion) was laid before a young
conveyancer, who, having much less business than Mr. Mortmain, would, it
was thought, "look into the case fully," though receiving only one-third
of the fee which had been paid to Mr. Mortmain. And Mr. FUSSY
FRANKPLEDGE--that was his name--_did_ "look into the case fully;" and in
doing so, turned over two-thirds of his little library;--and also
gleaned--by note and verbally--the opinions upon the subject of some
half-dozen of his "learned friends;" to say nothing of the magnificent
air with which he indoctrinated his eager and confiding pupils upon the
subject. At length his imp of a clerk bore the precious result of his
master's labors to Saffron Hill, in the shape of an "opinion," three
times as long as, and indescribably more difficult to understand than,
the opinion of Mr. Mortmain; and which if it demonstrated anything
beyond the prodigious _cram_ which had been undergone by its writer for
the purpose of producing it, demonstrated this--namely, that neither the
party indicated by Mr. Mortmain, nor the one then actually in
possession, had any more right to the estate than the aforesaid Mr.
Frankpledge; but that the happy individual so entitled was some third
person. Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, a good deal flustered hereat, hummed
and hawed on perusing these contradictory opinions of counsel learned in
the law; and the usual and proper result followed--_i. e._ a
"CONSULTATION," which was to solder up all the differences between Mr.
Mortmain and Mr. Frankpledge, or, at all events, strike out some light
which might guide their clients on their adventurous way.

Now, Mr. Mortmain had been Mr. Quirk's conveyancer (whenever such a
functionary's services had been required) for about twenty years; and
Quirk was ready to suffer death in defence of any opinion of Mr.
Mortmain. Mr. Gammon swore by Frankpledge, who had been at school with
him, and was a "rising man." Mortmain belonged to the old
school--Frankpledge steered by the new lights. The former could point to
some forty cases in the Law Reports, which had been ruled in conformity
with his previously given opinion, and some twenty which had been
overruled thereby; the latter gentleman, although he had been only five
years in practice, had written an _opinion_ which had led to a
suit--which had ended in a difference of opinion between the Court of
King's Bench and the Common Pleas; the credit of having done which was,
however, some time afterward, a little bit tarnished by the decision of
a Court of Error, without hearing the other side, _against_ the opinion
of Mr. Frankpledge. But----

Mr. Frankpledge quoted _so_ many cases, and went to the bottom of
everything, and gave so much for his money--and was _so_ civil!--

Well, the consultation came off, at length, at Mr. Mortmain's chambers,
at eight o'clock in the evening. A few minutes before that hour, Messrs.
Quirk and Gammon were to be seen in the clerk's room, in civil
conversation with that prim functionary, who explained to them that _he_
did all Mr. Mortmain's drafting--pupils were _so_ idle; that Mr.
Mortmain did not score out much of what he (the aforesaid clerk) had
drawn; that he noted up Mr. Mortmain's new cases for him in the reports,
Mr. M. having so little time; and that the other day the Vice-Chancellor
called on Mr. Mortmain--with several other matters of that sort,
calculated to enhance the importance of Mr. Mortmain; who, as the clerk
was asking Mr. Gammon, in a good-natured way, how long Mr. Frankpledge
had been in practice, and where his chambers were--made his appearance,
with a cheerful look and a bustling gait, having just walked down from
his house in Queen's Square, with a comfortable bottle of old port on
board. Shortly afterwards Mr. Frankpledge arrived, followed by his
little clerk, bending beneath two bags of books, (unconscious bearer of
as much law as had well-nigh split thousands of learned heads, and
broken tens of thousands of hearts, in the making of, being destined to
have a similar but far greater effect in the applying of,) and the
consultation began.

As Frankpledge entered, he could not help casting a sheep's eye towards
a table that glistened with _such_ an array of "papers," (a tasteful
arrangement of Mr. Mortmain's clerk before every consultation;) and down
sat the two conveyancers and the two attorneys. I devoutly wish I had
time to describe the scene at length; but greater events are pressing
upon me. The two conveyancers fenced with one another for some time very
guardedly and good-humoredly: pleasant was it to observe the conscious
condescension of Mortmain, the anxious energy and volubility of
Frankpledge. When Mr. Mortmain said anything that seemed weighty or
pointed, Quirk looked with an elated air, a quick triumphant glance, at
Gammon; who, in his turn, whenever Mr. Frankpledge quoted an "old case"
from Bendloe, Godbolt, or the Year Books, (which, having always piqued
himself on his almost exclusive acquaintance with the modern cases, he
made a point of doing,) gazed at Quirk with a smile of placid
superiority. Mr. Frankpledge talked almost the whole time; Mr. Mortmain,
immovable in the view of the case which he had taken in his "opinion,"
listened with an attentive, good-natured air, ruminating pleasantly the
while upon the quality of the port he had been drinking, (the first of
the bin which he had tasted,) and upon the decision which the Chancellor
might come to on a case brought into court on his advice, and which had
been argued that afternoon. At last Frankpledge unwittingly fell foul of
a favorite crotchet of Mortmain's--and at it they went, hammer and
tongs, for nearly twenty minutes, (it had nothing whatever to do with
the case they were consulting upon.) In the end, Mortmain of course
adhered to his points, and Frankpledge intrenched himself in his books;
each slightly yielded to the views of the other on immaterial points,
(or what would have appeared the use of the consultation?) but did that
which both had resolved upon doing from the first, _i. e._ sticking to
his original opinion. Both had talked an amazing deal of deep law, which
had at least one effect, viz. it fairly drowned both Quirk and Gammon,
who, as they went home, with not (it must be owned) the clearest
perceptions in the world of what had been going on, (though, before
going to the consultation, each had really known something about the
case,) stood each stoutly by his conveyancer's opinion, each protesting
that he had never been once misled--Quirk by Mortmain, or Gammon by
Frankpledge--and each resolved to give _his_ man more of the
conveyancing business of the house than he had before. I grieve to add,
that they parted that night with a trifle less of cordiality than had
been their wont. In the morning, however, this little irritation had
passed away; and they agreed, before giving up the case, to take the
final opinion of Mr. TRESAYLE--the great Mr. Tresayle. He was, indeed, a
wonderful conveyancer--a perfect miracle of real-property law-learning.
He had had such an enormous practice for forty-five years, that for the
last ten he had never put his nose out of chambers for pure want of
time, and at last of inclination; and had been so conversant with Norman
French and law Latin, in the old English letter, that he had almost
entirely forgotten how to write the modern English character. His
opinions made their appearance in three different kinds of handwriting.
First, one that none but he and his old clerk could make out; secondly,
one that none but he himself could read; and thirdly, one that neither
he, nor his clerk, nor any one on earth, could decipher. The use of any
one of these styles depended on--the difficulty of the case to be
answered. If it were an easy one, the answer was very judiciously put
into No. I.; if rather difficult, it, of course, went into No. II.; and
if exceedingly difficult, (and also important,) it was very properly
thrown into No. III.; being a question that really ought not to have
been asked, and did not deserve an answer. The fruit within these
uncouth shells, however, was precious. Mr. Tresayle's law was supreme
over everybody's else. It was currently reported that Lord Eldon even
(who was himself slightly acquainted with such subjects) reverently
deferred to the authority of Mr. Tresayle; and would lie winking and
knitting his shaggy eyebrows half the night, if he thought that Mr.
Tresayle's opinion on a case, and his own, differed. This was the great
authority to whom, as in the last resort, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap resolved to appeal. To his chambers they, within a day or two after
their consultation at Mr. Mortmain's, despatched their case, (making no
mention of the opinion which had been previously taken,) with a highly
respectable fee, and a special compliment to his clerk, hoping to hear
from that awful quarter within a month--which was the earliest average
period within which Mr. Tresayle's opinions found their way to his
patient but anxious clients. It came at length, with a note from Mr.
Prim, his clerk, intimating that they would find him, _i. e._ the
aforesaid Mr. Prim, at his chambers the next morning, prepared to
explain the opinion to them; having just had it read over to him by Mr.
Tresayle, for it proved to be in No. II. The opinion occupied about two
pages; and the handwriting bore a strong resemblance to Chinese or
Arabic, with a quaint intermixture of the uncial Greek character--it was
impossible to contemplate it without a certain feeling of awe! In vain
did old Quirk squint at it, from all corners, for nearly a couple of
hours, (having first called in the assistance of a friend of his, an old
attorney of upwards of fifty years' standing;) nay--even Mr. Gammon,
foiled at length, could not for the life of him refrain from a soft
curse or two. Neither of them could make anything of it--(as for Snap,
they never showed it to him; it was not within his province--_i. e._ the
Insolvent Debtors' Court, the Old Bailey, the Clerkenwell Sessions, the
Police Offices, the inferior business of the Common Law Courts, and the
worrying of the clerks of the office--a department in which he was
perfection itself.)

To their great delight, Mr. Tresayle took Mr. Mortmain's view of the
case. Nothing could be more terse, perspicuous, and conclusive than the
great man's opinion. Mr. Quirk was in raptures, and that very day sent
to procure an engraving of Mr. Tresayle, which had lately come out, for
which he paid 5s., and ordered it to be framed and hung up in his own
room, where already grinned a quaint resemblance, in black profile, of
Mr. Mortmain, cheek by jowl with that of a notorious traitor who had
been hanged in spite of Mr. Quirk's best exertions. In special
good-humor, he assured Mr. Gammon, (who was plainly somewhat crestfallen
about Mr. Frankpledge,) that everybody must have a beginning; that even
he himself (Mr. Quirk) had been once only a beginner.

Once fairly on the scent, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon soon began, secretly
but energetically, to push their inquiries in all directions. They
discovered that Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse, having spent the chief
portion of his blissful days as a cobbler at Whitehaven, had died in
London, somewhere about the year 1793. At this point they stood for a
long while, in spite of two advertisements, to which they had been
driven with the greatest reluctance, for fear of attracting the
attention of those most interested in thwarting their efforts. Even that
part of the affair had been managed somewhat skilfully. It was a stroke
of Mr. Gammon's to advertise not for "Heir-at-Law," but "_Next of Kin_,"
as the reader has seen. The former might have challenged the notice of
unfriendly curiosity, which the latter was hardly calculated to attract.
At length--at the "third time of asking"--up turned Tittlebat Titmouse,
in the way which we have seen. His relationship with Mr. Gabriel
Tittlebat Titmouse was indisputable; in fact, he was (to adopt his own
words) that "deceased person's" son and heir-at-law.

The reader may guess the chagrin and disgust of Mr. Gammon at the
appearance, manners, and character of the person whom he fully believed,
on first seeing him at Messrs. Tag-rag's, to be the rightful owner of
the fine estates held by one who, as against Mr. Titmouse, had no more
real title to them than had Mr. Tag-rag; and for whom their house was to
undertake the very grave risk and expense of instituting such
proceedings as would be requisite to place Mr. Titmouse in the position
which they believed him entitled to occupy--having to encounter a hot
and desperate opposition at every point, from those who had nine-tenths
of the law--to wit, _possession_--on their side, on which they stood as
upon a rock; and with immense means for carrying on the war defensive.
That Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap did not contemplate undertaking all
this, without having calculated upon its proving well worthy their
while, was only reasonable. They were going voluntarily to become the
means of conferring immense benefits upon one who was a total stranger
to them--who had not a penny to spend upon the prosecution of his own
rights. Setting aside certain difficulties which collected themselves
into two awkward words, MAINTENANCE and CHAMPERTY, and stared them in
the face whenever they contemplated any obvious method of securing the
just reward of their enterprise and toils--setting aside all this, I
say, it might turn out, only after a ruinous expenditure had been
incurred, that the high authorities which had sanctioned their
proceedings in point of law, had expressed their favorable opinions on a
state of facts, which, however satisfactorily they looked on paper,
could not be substantiated, if keenly sifted, and determinedly resisted.
All this, too--all their time, labor, and money, to go for nothing--on
behalf of a vulgar, selfish, ignorant, presumptuous, ungrateful puppy,
like Titmouse!--Well indeed, therefore, might Mr. Gammon, as we have
seen he did, give himself and partners a forty-eight hours' interval,
between his interview with Titmouse and formal introduction of him to
the firm, in which to consider their position and mode of procedure. The
taste of his quality which that first interview afforded them all--so
far surpassing all that the bitter description of him given to them by
Mr. Gammon had prepared them for--filled the partners with inexpressible
disgust, and would have induced them to throw up the whole affair--so
getting rid both of it, and of him, together. But then, on the other
hand, there were certain very great advantages, both of a professional
and even directly pecuniary kind, which it would have been madness
indeed for any office lightly to throw away. It was really, after all,
an unequal struggle between feeling and interest. If they should succeed
in unseating the present wrongful possessor of a very splendid property,
and putting in his place the rightful owner, by means alone of their own
professional ability, perseverance, and heavy pecuniary outlay, (a
fearful consideration, truly, but Mr. Quirk had scraped together some
thirty thousand pounds!) what recompense could be too great for such
resplendent services? To say nothing of the _éclat_ which it would gain
for their office, in the profession and in the world at large, and the
substantial and permanent advantages to the firm, if, as they ought to
be, they were intrusted with the general management of the property by
the new and inexperienced and confiding owner--ay, but there was the
rub! What a disheartening and disgusting specimen of such new owner had
disclosed itself to their anxiously expecting but soon recoiling
eyes--always, however, making due allowances for one or two cheering
indications, on Mr. Titmouse's part, of a certain rapacious and
litigious humor, which might hereafter right pleasantly and profitably
occupy their energies! Their professional position, and their interests
had long made them sharp observers; but when did ever before low and
disgusting qualities force themselves into revolting prominence, as
those of Mr. Titmouse had done, in the very moment of an expected
display of the better feelings of human nature--such as enthusiastic
gratitude? They had, in their time, had to deal with some pleasant
specimens of humanity, to be sure; but when with any more odious and
impracticable than Tittlebat Titmouse threatened to prove himself? What
hold could they get upon such a character as his? Beneath all his
coarseness and weakness, there was a glimmer of low cunning which might
suffice to keep their superior and practised astuteness at its full
stretch. These were difficulties, cheerless enough in the contemplation,
truly; but, nevertheless, the partners could not bear the idea of
escaping from them by throwing up the affair altogether. Then came the
question--How were they to manage Mr. Titmouse?--how acquire an early
and firm hold of him, so as to convert him into a _capital client_? His
fears and his interests were obviously the engines with which their
experienced hands were to work; and several long and most anxious
consultations had Messrs. Quirk and Gammon had on this important matter.
The first great question with them was--To what extent, and when, they
should acquaint him with the nature of his expectations.

Gammon was for keeping him comparatively in the dark, till success was
within reach: during that interval, (which might be a long one,) by
alternately stimulating his hopes and fears; by habituating him to an
entire dependence on them; by persuading him of the prodigious extent of
their exertions and sacrifices on his behalf--they _might_ do something;
mould him into a shape fit for their purposes, and persuade him that his
affairs must needs go to ruin but in their hands. Something like this
was the scheme of the cautious, acute, and placid Gammon. Mr. Quirk,
however, (with whom, as will be hereafter shown, had originated the
whole discovery,) thought thus:--tell the fellow at once the whole
extent of what we can do for him, viz. turn a half-starving
linen-draper's shopman into the owner of £10,000 a-year, and of a great
store of ready money. This will, in a manner, stun him into submission,
and make him at once and for all what we want him to be. He will
immediately fall prostrate with reverent gratitude--looking at us,
moreover, as three gods, who, at our will, can shut him out of heaven.
"_That's_ the way to bring down your bird," said Mr. Quirk; and Mr.
Quirk had been forty years in practice--had made the business what it
was--still held half of it in his own hands, (two-thirds of the
remaining half being Gammon's, and the residue Snap's:) and Gammon,
moreover, had a very distinct perception that the funds for carrying on
the war would come out of the tolerably well-stored pockets of the
august head of the firm. So, after a long discussion, he openly yielded
his opinion to that of Mr. Quirk--cherishing, however, a very warm
respect for it in his own bosom. As for Snap, that distinguished member
of the firm was very little consulted in the matter; which had not yet
been brought to that stage where his powerful energies could come into
play. He had of course, however, heard a good deal of what was going on;
and knew that ere long there would be the copying out and serving of the
Lord knows how many copies of declarations in ejectment, motions against
the casual ejector, and so forth--so far at least as he was "up to" all
those quaint and anomalous proceedings. It had, therefore, been at
length agreed that the communication to Titmouse, on his first
interview, of the full extent of his splendid expectations, should
depend upon the discretion of Mr. Quirk. The reader has seen the
unexpected turn which matters took upon that important occasion; and if
it proved Quirk's policy to be somewhat inferior in point of discretion
and long-sightedness to that of Gammon, still it must be owned that the
latter had cause to admire the rapid generalship with which Mr. Quirk
had obviated the consequences of his false move--not ill seconded by
Snap. What could have been more judicious than his reception of
Titmouse, on the occasion of his being led in again by the subtle
Gammon?

The next and greatest matter was, how to obtain any hold upon such a
person as Titmouse had shown himself, so as to secure to themselves, in
the event of success, the remuneration to which they considered
themselves entitled. Was it so perfectly clear that, if he felt disposed
to resist it, they could compel him to pay the mere amount of their bill
of costs?

Suppose he should turn round upon them, and have their BILL TAXED--Mr.
Quirk grunted with fright at the bare thought. Then there was a slapping
_quiddam honorarium_ extra--undoubtedly for _that_ they must, they
feared, trust to the honor and gratitude of Mr. Titmouse; and a pretty
taste of the quality of that animal they had already experienced! Such a
disposition as _his_, to have to rely upon for the prompt settlement of
a bill of thousands of pounds of costs! and, besides that, to have it to
look to for the payment of at least some five or perhaps ten thousand
pounds _douceur_--nay, and this was not all. Mr. Quirk had, as well as
Mr. Gammon, cast many an anxious eye on the following passages from
_Blackstone's Commentaries_:--

     "MAINTENANCE is an officious intermeddling in a suit that no way
     belongs to one, by 'maintaining' or assisting either party with
     money, or otherwise, to prosecute or defend it.... It is an offence
     against public justice, as it keeps alive strife and contention,
     and perverts the remedial process of the law into an engine of
     oppression.... The punishment by common law is fine and
     imprisonment, and by statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 9, a forfeiture of
     £10!

     "CHAMPERTY--(_campi partitio_)--is a species of Maintenance, and
     punished in the same manner; being a bargain with a plaintiff or
     defendant '_campum partiri_,' to divide the land, or other matter
     sued for, between them, if they prevail at law; whereupon the
     champertor is to carry on the suit at his own expense.... These
     pests of civil society, that are perpetually endeavoring to disturb
     the repose of their neighbors, and officiously interfering in other
     men's quarrels, even at the hazard of their own fortunes, were
     severely animadverted on by the Roman law; and they were punished
     by the forfeiture of a third part of their goods, and perpetual
     infamy."[4]

These were pleasant passages surely!----

Many were the conversations and consultations which the partners had had
with Messrs. Mortmain and Frankpledge respectively, upon the interesting
question, whether there were any mode of at once securing themselves
against the ingratitude of Titmouse, and protecting themselves against
the penalties of the law. It made old Mr. Quirk's bald head, even, flush
all over whenever he thought of their bill being taxed, or contemplated
himself the inmate of a prison, (above all, at his advanced time of
life,) with mournful leisure to meditate upon the misdeeds that had sent
him thither, to which profitable exercise the legislature would have
specially stimulated him by a certain _fine_ above mentioned. As for
Gammon, he knew there _must_ be a way of doing the thing somehow or
another; for his friend Frankpledge felt infinitely less difficulty in
the way than Mortmain, whom he considered a timid and old-fashioned
practitioner. The courts, said Mr. Frankpledge, were now setting their
faces strongly against the doctrine of Maintenance, as being founded on
a bygone state of things: _cessante ratione cessat et ipsa lex_, was his
favorite maxim. There was no wrong without a remedy, he said; and was
there not a _wrong_ in the case of a poor man wrongfully deprived of his
own? And how could this be _remedied_, if the old law of Maintenance
stood like a bugbear in the way of humane and spirited practitioners?
Was no one to be at liberty to take up the cause of the oppressed,
encouraged by the prospect of an ample recompense? It might be said,
perhaps--let the claimant sue _in formâ pauperis_: but then he must
swear that he is not worth five pounds; and a man may not be able to
take that oath, and yet be unequal to the commencement of a suit
requiring the outlay of thousands. Moreover, a pretty prospect it was
for such a suitor, (_in formâ pauperis_,) if he should happen to be
nonsuited--to be "put to his election, whether to be whipped or pay the
costs."[5] Thus reasoned within himself that astute person, Mr.
Frankpledge; and at length satisfied himself that he had framed an
instrument which would "meet the case"--that "would hold water." To the
best of my recollection, it was a BOND, conditioned to pay the sum of
ten thousand pounds to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, within two
months of Titmouse's being put into possession of the rents and profits
of the estate in question. The _condition_ of that bond was, as its
framer believed, drawn in a masterly manner; and his draft was lying
before Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, on the Wednesday morning,
(_i. e._ the day after Titmouse's interview with them,) and had
succeeded at length in exciting the approbation of Mr. Quirk himself;
when--whew!--down came a note from Mr. Frankpledge, to the effect that,
"since preparing the draft bond," he had "had reason _slightly to
modify_ his original opinion," owing to his "having lit upon a LATE
CASE," in which an instrument precisely similar to the one which he had
prepared for his admiring clients, had been held "totally ineffectual
and void both at law and in equity." I say, Mr. Frankpledge's note was
to that effect; for so ingeniously had he framed it--so effectually
concealed his retreat beneath a little cloud of contradictory
authorities, like as the ink-fish, they say, eludeth its pursuers--that
his clients cursed the law, not their draftsman; and, moreover, by
prudently withholding the _name_ of the "late case," he, at all events
for a while, had prevented their observing that it was _senior_ to some
eight or ten cases which (indefatigable man!) he had culled for them out
of the legal garden, and arrayed on the back of his draft. Slightly
disconcerted were Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, it may be believed, at this
new view of the "result of the authorities." "Mortmain is always right!"
said Quirk, looking hard at Gammon; who observed simply that one day
Frankpledge would be as old as Mortmain then was--by which time (thought
he) I also know where--please God--_you_ will be, my old friend, if
there's any truth in the Scriptures! In this pleasant frame of mind were
the partners, when the impudent apparition of Huckaback presented
itself, in the manner which has been described. Huckaback's commentary
upon the disgusting text of Titmouse over-night, (as a lawyer would say,
in analogy to a well-known term, "Coke upon Littleton,") produced an
effect upon their minds which may be easily imagined. It was while their
minds were under these two soothing influences, _i. e._ of the insolence
of Huckaback and the vacillation of Frankpledge, that Mr. Gammon had
penned the note to Titmouse, (surely, under the circumstances, one of
extraordinary temper and forbearance,) which had occasioned him the
agonies I have been attempting faintly to describe;--and that Quirk,
summoning Snap into the room, had requested him to give orders for
denial to Titmouse if he should again make his appearance at the office;
which injunction Snap forthwith delivered in the clerk's room, in a tone
and manner that were a very model of the _imperative mood_.

A day or two afterwards, Mr. Quirk, (who was a man that stuck like a
limpet to a rock to any point which occurred to him,) in poring over
that page in the fourth volume of _Blackstone's Commentaries_, where
were to be found the passages which have been already quoted, (and which
both Quirk and Gammon had long had off by heart,) as he sat one day at
dinner, at home, whither he had taken the volume in question, fancied he
had at last hit upon a notable crotchet, which, the more he thought of,
the more he was struck with; determining to pay a visit in the morning
to Mr. Mortmain. The spark of light that had twinkled till it kindled in
the tinder of his mind, was struck by his hard head out of the following
sentence of the text in question:--

     "A man _may_, however, maintain the suit of his near kinsman,
     servant, or POOR NEIGHBOR, out of _charity and compassion_, with
     impunity; _otherwise_, the punishment is," &c. &c.[6]

Now, it seemed to Mr. Quirk, that the words which I have placed in
italics and small capitals, met the case of poor Tittlebat Titmouse
exactly. He stuck to that view of the case, till he _almost_ began to
think that he really had a kind of a sort of a charity and compassion
for poor Tittlebat--kept out of his rights--tyrannized over by a vulgar
draper in Oxford Street--where, too, no doubt, he was half
starved.--"It's a great blessing that one's got the means--and the
inclination, to serve one's poor neighbors"--thought Quirk, as he
swallowed glass after glass of the _wine that maketh glad the heart of
man_--and also _softens_ it;--for the more he drank, the more and more
pitiful became his mood--the more sensitive was he to compassionate
suggestions; and by the time that he had finished the decanter, he was
all but in tears! These virtuous feelings brought their own reward,
too--for, from time to time, they conjured up, as it were, the faint
rainbow image of a bond conditioned for the payment of TEN THOUSAND
POUNDS!

To change the metaphor a little--by the time that old Quirk had reached
his office in the morning, the heated iron had cooled. If his heart
_had_ retained any of the maudlin softness of the preceding evening, the
following pathetic letter from Titmouse might have made a very deep
impression upon it, and fixed him, in the benevolent and disinterested
mind of the old lawyer, as indeed his "poor neighbor." The following is
an exact copy of that lucid and eloquent composition. It had been
written by Mr. Titmouse, all out of his own head; and with his own hand
had he left it at the office, at a late hour on the preceding evening.


                 "_To Messrs._ QUERK, GAMON, _and_ SNAPE.

     "GENTS,

     "Y^r Esteem'd Favor lies now before Me, which _must Say_ have Given
     me Much Concern, seeing I Thought it was All Made up betwixt us
     That was of Such an _Unpleasant Nature_ on Tuesday night (ultimo)
     w^h I most humbly Own (and Acknowledge) was all alone and
     _intirely_ of My Own Fault, and Not in the Least Your's which
     behaved to me, Must say, In the most Respectful and superior manner
     that was possible to think Of, for I truly Say I never was In the
     Company of Such Imminent and Superior Gents before In my Life w^h
     will take my Oath sincerely Of, Gents. Please to consider the
     Brandy (w^h _do_ think _was Uncommon Stiff_) such a flustrum As I
     was In before, to, w^h was Evident to All of Us there then
     Assemblid and very natral like to be the Case Seeing I have nevir
     known what Peas of Mind was since I behaved in Such a _Oudacious_
     way w^h truly was the case I can't Deny to Such Gents as Yourselfs
     that were doing me such Good Fortune And Kindness to me as it would
     Be a Dreadful _sin and shame_ (such as Trust I can never be Guilty
     of) to be (w^h am not) and never Can Be insensible Of, Gents do
     Consider all this Favorably because of my humble Amends w^h I here
     Make with the greatest Trouble in my Mind that I have Had Ever
     Since, it was all of the Sperrits I Tooke w^h made me Go On at such
     a Rate w^h was always (beg to Assure y^r most resp^e house) the
     Case Since my birth when I took Sperrits never so little Since I
     had the Meazles when I was 3 Years Old as I Well Recollect and hope
     it will be Born in Mind what is Often Said, and I'm Sure I've read
     it Somewhere Else that People that Is Drunk Always speaks the
     _Direct Contrarywise_ of their True and Real Thoughts. (w^h am
     Certain never was any Thing Truer in my case) so as I get the Money
     or What not, do whatever you Like w^h are quite welcome to Do if
     you please, and No questions Asked, don't Mind saying by The Way It
     shall Be As Good as £200 note in The way of your resp^e House if I
     Get the Estate of w^h am much in Want of. Mr. Gamon (w^h is the
     most Upright gent that ever I came across in All my Life) will tell
     you that I Was Quite Cut up when he came After me in that kind Way
     and told him Then how I loved y^r Respect^e House and would do all
     In My power to Serve You, which see if I Don't, I was in Such a
     rage with that Fellow (He's only in a _Situation_ in Tottenham C^t
     Road) Huckaback which is his true name it was an _oudacious_ thing,
     and have given him such a Precious Good hiding last Night as you
     never saw when on his Bendid Knees He asked the pardon of your
     Respectable House, say^g nothing of Me w^h w^d not allow because I
     said I would Not Forgive Him because he had not injured me: But
     you, w^h I wonder at his _Impudence_ in Calling on Professional
     Gents like you, if I get the Estate shall never cease to Think well
     of you and mean While how full of Trouble I am _Often Thinking Of
     Death_ which is the End of Every Thing And then in that Case who
     will the Property Go to Seeing I Leave never a Brother or Sister
     Behind me. And Therefore Them That w^d Get it I Feel Sure of w^d
     Not do So well by you (if You will Only believe Me) So Gents. This
     is All at present That I will Make so Bold to trouble you With
     About my Unhappy Affairs Only to say That am _used_ most
     Intolerably Bad now In The Shop quite Tyranicall And Mr. Tag-Rag as
     Set Them All Against Me and I shall Never Get Another Situat^n for
     want of a Char^r which he will give me say^g noth^g at Present of
     the Sort of Victules w^h give me Now to Eat Since Monday last, For
     Which am Sure the Devil must have Come In to That Gentleman (Mr.
     Tag-rag, he was only himself in a Situation in Holborn once, gett^g
     the Business by marry^g the widow w^h wonder At for he is nothing
     Particular to Look At.) I am y^rs

     Humbly to Command Till Death (always Humbly Begging pardon for the
     bad Conduct w^h was guilty of when In Liquor Especially On an Empty
     Stomach, Having Taken Nothing all that Day excepting what I could
     not Eat,)

                             "Your's most Resp^y
                                                  "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

     "P. S. Will Bring That young Man with Tears In his Eyes to Beg y^r
     pardon Over again If You Like w^h will Solemnly Swear if Required
     That he did It all of His _own_ Head And that Have given It him For
     it in the Way That is Written Above And humbly Trust You Will make
     Me So happy Once more by writing To Me (if it is only a Line) To
     say You Have Thought No more of it T. T. No. 9 Closet C^t. Oxford
     Street. 14/7/18--"

This exquisitely-skilful epistle might indeed have brought tears into
Mr. Quirk's eyes, if he had been _used_ to the melting mood, which he
was not; having never been seen actually to shed a tear but once--when
five-sixths of his little bill of costs (£196, 15s. 4d.) were taxed off
in an auction on a Bill of Exchange for £13.[7] As it was, he tweedled
the letter about in his hands for about five minutes, in a musing mood,
and then stepped with it into Mr. Gammon's room. That gentleman took the
letter with an air of curiosity, and read it over; at every sentence (if
indeed a sentence there was in it) bursting into soft laughter.

"Ha, ha, ha!" he laughed on concluding it--"a comical gentleman, Mr.
Titmouse, upon my honor!"

"Funny--isn't it rather?" interposed Mr. Quirk, standing with his hands
fumbling about in his breeches pockets.

"What a crawling despicable little rascal!--ha, ha, ha!"

"Why--I don't quite say that, either," said Quirk, doubtingly--"I--don't
exactly look at it in _that_ light!"

"My dear sir!" exclaimed Gammon, leaning back in his chair, and laughing
rather heartily, (at least for him.)

"You can't leave off that laugh of yours," said Quirk, a little tartly;
"but I must say I don't see anything in the letter to laugh at so
particularly. It is written in a most respectful manner, and shows a
proper feeling towards the House!"

"Ay! see how he speaks of _me_!" interrupted Gammon, with such a
smile!--

"And doesn't he speak so of me? and all of us?"

"He'll let the house tread on him till he can tread on the house, I dare
say."

"But you must own, Mr. Gammon, it shows we've licked him into shape a
bit--eh?"

"Oh, it's a little vile creeping reptile now, and so it will be to the
end of the chapter--of our proceedings; and when we've _done_
everything--really, Mr. Quirk! if one _were_ apt to lose one's temper,
it would be to see such a _thing_ as that put into possession of such a
fortune."

"That may be, Mr. Gammon; but I really--hem!--trust--I've--a higher
feeling!--To right--the injured"---- He could get no farther.

"Hem!" exclaimed Gammon.

The partners smiled at one another. A touch, or an attempted touch at
_disinterestedness_!--and at Quirk's time of life!

"But he's now in a humor for _training_, at all events--isn't he?"
exclaimed Quirk--"we've something now to go to work upon--gradually."

"Isn't that a leaf out of my book, Mr. Quirk?--isn't that exactly
what"----

"Well, well--what does it signify?" interrupted Quirk, rather
petulantly--"I've got a crotchet that'll do for us, yet, about the
matter of law, and make all right and tight--so I'm going to Mortmain."

"I've got a little idea of my own of that sort, Mr. Quirk," said
Gammon--"I've got an extract from Co-Litt--. I can't imagine how either
of them could have missed it; and, as Frankpledge dines with me to-day,
we shall talk it all over. But, by the way, Mr. Quirk, I should say,
with all deference, that we'll take no more notice of this fellow till
we've got some screw tight enough"----

"Why--all that may be very well; but you see, Gammon, the fellow seems
the real heir, after all--and if _he_ don't get it, _no one can_; and if
_he_ don't--_we_ don't! eh?"

"There's a very great deal of force in that observation, Mr. Quirk--it
gives one another view of the subject!"--said Gammon,
emphatically:--and, tolerably well pleased with one another, they
parted. If Quirk might be compared to an old file, Gammon was the
_oil_!--so they got on, in the main, very well together. It hardly
signifies what was the result of their interviews with their two
conveyancers. The two partners met the next morning on ordinary
business; and as each made no allusions whatever to the "crotchet" of
the day before, it may be safely inferred that each had been satisfied
by his conveyancer of having found out a mare's nest.

"I think, by the way," said Mr. Gammon to Mr. Quirk, before they parted
on the previous evening, "it may be as well, all things considered, to
acknowledge the receipt of the fellow's note--eh?--_Can't_ do any harm,
you know, and civility costs nothing--hem!"

"The very thing I was thinking of," replied Quirk, as he always did, on
hearing any suggestion from Mr. Gammon. So by that night's post was
despatched (post-paid) the following note to Mr. Titmouse:--

     "Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap have the pleasure of acknowledging
     the receipt of Mr. Titmouse's polite letter of last night's date;
     and earnestly beg that he will not distress himself about the
     little incident that occurred at their office on Tuesday night, and
     which they assure him they have quite forgotten. They made all
     allowances, however their feelings suffered at the time. They beg
     Mr. T. will give them credit for not losing sight of his interests,
     to the best of their ability; obstructed as they are, however, by
     numerous serious difficulties. If they should be hereafter
     overcome, he may rest assured of their promptly communicating with
     him; and till then they trust Mr. T. will not inconvenience himself
     by calling on, or writing to them.

     _Saffron Hill, 15th July 18--._

     "P. S.--Messrs. Q. G. and S. regret to hear that any unpleasantness
     has arisen (Gammon could hardly write for laughing) between Mr.
     Titmouse and his friend Mr. Hicklebagle, who, they assure him,
     manifested a very warm interest in behalf of Mr. T., and conducted
     himself with the greatest propriety on the occasion of his calling
     upon Messrs. Q. G. and S. They happened at that moment to be
     engaged in matters of the highest importance; which will, they
     trust, explain any appearance of abruptness they might have
     exhibited towards that gentleman. Perhaps Mr. Titmouse will be so
     obliging as to intimate as much to Mr. Hickerbag."

There was an obvious reason for this polite allusion to Huckaback.
Gammon thought it very possible that that gentleman might be in Mr.
Titmouse's confidence, and exercise a powerful influence over him
hereafter; and that influence Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap might find
it well worth their while to secure beforehand.

The moment that Titmouse, with breathless haste, had read over this
mollifying document, which being directed to his lodgings correctly, he
obtained as soon as he had got home, after quitting Mr. Tag-rag, about
ten o'clock, he hastened to his friend Huckaback. That gentleman (who
seemed now virtually recognized by Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap as
Titmouse's confidant) shook his head ominously, exclaiming--"Blarny,
blarny!" and a bitter sneer settled on his disagreeable features, till
he had read down to the postscript; the perusal of which effected a
sudden change in his feelings. He declared, with a great oath, that
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap were "perfect gentlemen," and would "do
the right thing after all--Titmouse might depend upon it;" an assurance
which greatly cheered Titmouse, to whose keen discernment it never once
occurred to refer Huckaback's altered tone to the right cause, viz. the
lubricating quality of the postscript; and since Titmouse did not allude
to it, no more did Mr. Huckaback, although his own double misnomer stuck
not a little in his throat. So effectual, indeed, had been that most
skilful postscript upon the party at whom it had been aimed, that he
exerted himself unceasingly to revive Titmouse's confidence in Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and so far succeeded, that Titmouse returned to
his lodgings at a late hour, a somewhat happier, if not a _wiser_ man
than he had left them. By the time, however, that he had got into bed,
having once more spelled over the note in question, he felt as
despondent as ever, and thought that Huckaback had not known what he had
been talking about. He also adverted to an _apparently_ careless
allusion by Huckaback to the injuries which had been inflicted upon him
by Titmouse on the Wednesday night: and which, by the way, Huckaback
determined it should be no fault of his if Titmouse easily forgot! He
hardly knew why--but he disliked this particularly.--Whom had he,
however, in the world, but Huckaback? In company with him alone,
Titmouse felt that his pent-up feelings could discharge themselves.
Huckaback had certainly a wonderful knack of keeping up Titmouse's
spirits, whatever cause he fancied he might really have for depression.
In short, he longed for the Sunday morning, ushering in a day of rest
and sympathy. Titmouse would indeed then have to look back upon an
agitating and miserable week, what with the dismal upsetting of his
hopes in the manner I have described, and the tyrannical treatment which
he had experienced at Tag-rag and Co.'s. His tormentor there, however,
began at length, in some degree, to relax his _active_ exertions against
Titmouse, simply because of the exertion requisite for keeping them up.
He attributed the pallid cheek and depressed manner of Titmouse entirely
to the discipline which had been inflicted upon him at the shop; and was
gratified at perceiving that all his other young men seemed, especially
in his presence, to have imbibed his hatred of Titmouse. What produced
in Tag-rag this hatred of Titmouse? Simply what had taken place on the
Monday. Mr. Tag-rag's dignity and power had been doggedly set at nought
by one of his shopmen, who had since refused to make the least
submission, or offer any kind of apology. Such conduct struck at the
root of subordination in his great establishment. Again, there is
perhaps nothing in the world so calculated to enrage a petty and vulgar
mind to the highest pitch of malignity, as the cool persevering defiance
of an inferior, whom it strives to _despise_, while it is only _hating_,
feeling at the same time such to be the case. Tag-rag now and then, when
he looked towards Titmouse, as he stood behind the counter, felt as
though he could have killed the little ape. Titmouse attempted once or
twice, during the week, to obtain a situation elsewhere, but in vain.
He could expect no character from Tag-rag; and when the 10th of August
should have arrived, what was to become of him? These were the kind of
thoughts often passing through his mind during the Sunday, which he and
Huckaback spent together in unceasing conversation on the one absorbing
event of the last week. Titmouse, poor little puppy, had dressed himself
with just as much care as usual; but as he was giving the finishing
touches at his toilet, pumping up grievous sighs every half minute, the
sum of his reflections might be stated in the miserable significance of
a quaint saying of Poor Richard's--"How hard is it to make an empty sack
stand upright!"

Although the sun shone as vividly and beautifully as on the preceding
Sunday, to Titmouse's saddened eye there seemed a sort of gloom
everywhere. Up and down the Park he and Huckaback walked, towards the
close of the afternoon; but Titmouse had not so elastic a strut as
before. He felt empty and sinking. Everybody seemed to know what a sad
pretender he was: and the friends quitted the magic circle much earlier
than had been usual with Titmouse. What with the fatigue of a long day's
saunter, the vexation of having had but a hasty, inferior, and
unrefreshing meal, which did not deserve the name of dinner, and their
unpleasant thoughts, both seemed depressed as they walked along the
streets. At length they arrived at the open doors of a gloomy-looking
building, into which two or three sad and prim-looking people were
entering. After walking a few paces past the door--"Do you know, Huck,"
said Titmouse, stopping, "I've often thought that--that--there's
something in _Religion_."

"To be sure there is, for those that like it--who doubts it? It's all
very well in its place, no doubt," replied Huckaback, with much
surprise, which increased, as he felt himself being slowly swayed round
towards the building in question. "But what of that?"

"Oh, nothing; but--hem! hem!" replied Titmouse, sinking his voice to a
whisper--"a touch of--religion--eh?--would not be so much amiss, just
now! I feel--uncommon inclined that way, somehow, 'pon my soul!"

"Religion's all very well, Titty, dear!--for them that has much to be
thankful for; but devil take me! what have either you or me to be"----

"But, Huck--how do you know but we might _get_ something to be thankful
for, by praying?--I've often heard of great things in that
line--but--_do_ come in with me, Huck!"

Huckaback stood for a moment irresolute, twirling about his cane, and
looking rather distastefully towards the dingy building. "It won't
answer," said he, faintly. Titmouse drew him nearer; but he suddenly
started back.--"No! oh, 'tis only a meeting-house, Tit! Curse
Dissenters, how I hate 'em! Isn't your precious governor one in that
line? Give _me_ a regular-like, respectable church, with a proper
steeple, and parson, and prayers, and an organ, and all that!"

Titmouse secretly acknowledged the force of these observations; and the
intelligent and piously disposed couple, with perhaps a just, but
certainly a somewhat sudden regard for orthodoxy, were not long before
they had found their way into a church where evening service was being
performed. They ascended the gallery stair; and seeing no reason to be
ashamed of being at church, down they both went, with loud clattering
steps and a bold air, into the very central seat (which happened to be
vacant) in the front of the gallery. Titmouse paid a most exemplary
attention to what was going on, kneeling, sitting, and standing with
exact propriety, in the proper places; joining audibly in the responses,
and keeping his eyes pretty steadily on the prayer-book, which he found
lying there. He even rebuked Huckaback for whispering (during one of the
most solemn parts of the service) that "there was an uncommon pretty gal
in the next pew!"--He thought that the clergyman was a remarkable fine
preacher, and said some things that he _must_ have meant for him,
Titmouse, in particular!

"Curse me, Hucky!" said he, heatedly, as soon as they had quitted the
church, and were fairly in the street--"Curse me if--if--ever I felt so
comfortable-like in my mind before, as I do now--see if I don't go again
next Sunday!"

"Lord, Tit, you don't _really_ mean--eh?--it's deuced dull work!"

"Hang me if I don't, though! and if anything should come of it--if I
_do_ but get the estate--(I wonder, now, where _Mr. Gammon_ goes to
church. I should like to know!--I'd go there regularly)--But if I _do_
get the thing--you see if I don't"----

"Ah, I don't know; it's not much use praying for money, Tit; I've tried
it myself, once or twice, but it didn't answer!"

"I'll take my oath you was staring at the gals all the while, Hucky!"

"Ah, Titty!" exclaimed Huckaback, and winked his eye, and put the tip of
his forefinger to the tip of his nose, and laughed.

Titmouse continued in what he doubtless imagined to be a devout frame of
mind, for several minutes after quitting the church. But close by the
aforesaid church, the devil had a thriving little establishment, in the
shape of a cigar-shop; in which a showily-dressed young Jewess sat
behind the counter, right underneath a glaring gas-light--with a narrow
stripe of greasy black velvet across her forehead, and long ringlets
resting on her shoulders--bandying slang with two or three other such
creatures as Titmouse and Huckaback. Our friends entered and purchased a
cigar a-piece, which they lit on the spot; and after each of them had
exchanged an impudent wink with the Jewess, out they went, puffing
away--all the remains of their piety! When they had come to the end of
their cigars they parted, each speeding homeward. Titmouse, on reaching
his lodgings, sank into profound depression. He felt an awful conviction
that his visit to the cigar-shop had entirely spoiled the effect of his
previous attendance at the church; and that, if so disposed, (and it
served him right,) he might now sit and whistle for his ten thousand
a-year. Thoughts such as these drove him nearly distracted. If, indeed,
he had foreseen having to go through such another week as the one just
over, I think it not impossible that before the arrival of the ensuing
Sunday, he might have afforded a little employment to that ancient and
gloomy functionary, a coroner, and his jury. At that time, however,
inquests of this sort were matter-of-fact and melancholy affairs enough;
which I doubt not would have been rather a _dissuasive_ from suicide, in
the estimation of one who might be supposed ambitious of the _éclat_ of
a modern inquest; where, indeed, such strange antics are played by
certain new performers as would suffice to revive the corpse, (if it
were a corpse that had ever had a spark of sense or spirit in it,) and
make it kick the coroner out of the room.[8] But to one of so high an
ambition as Tittlebat Titmouse, how delightful would it not have been,
to anticipate becoming (what had been quite impracticable during life)
the object of public attention after his death--by means of a flaming
dissertation by the coroner on his own zeal and spirit--the nature and
extent of his rights, powers, and duties;--when high doctors are
brow-beaten, the laws set at defiance, and public decency plucked by the
beard, and the torn and bleeding hearts of surviving relatives still
further agonized by an exposure, all quivering under the recent stroke,
to the gaping vulgar! Indeed, I sometimes think that the object of
certain coroners, now-a-days, is twofold; first, public--to disgust
people with suicide, by showing what horrid proceedings will take place
over their carcasses; and secondly, private--to get the means of
studying anatomy by _post mortems_, which the said coroner never could
procure in his own practice; which enables us to account for some things
one has lately seen, viz. that if a man come to his death by means of a
wagon crushing his legs, the coroner institutes an exact examination of
the structure of the _lungs_ and _heart_. I take it to be getting now
into a rule--the propriety whereof, some people think, cannot be
doubted--namely, that bodies ought now to be opened only to prove that
they ought not to have been opened; an inquest must be held, in order to
demonstrate that it need not have been held, except that certain fees
thereby find their way into the pocket of the aforesaid coroner, which
would otherwise not have done so. In short, such a coroner as I have in
my eye may be compared to a great ape squatting on a corpse, furiously
chattering and spitting at all around it; and I am glad that it hath at
last had wit enough first to _shut the door_ before proceeding to its
horrid tricks.

Touching, by the way, the _moral_ of suicide, it is a way which some
have of _cutting_ the Gordian knot of the difficulties of life; which
having been done, possibly the very first thing made manifest to the
spirit, after taking its mad leap into the dark may be--how very easily
the said knot might have been UNTIED; nay, that it was _on the very
point_ of being untied, if the impatient spirit had stayed only a moment
longer!

I said it was not _impossible_ that Mr. Titmouse might, under the
circumstances alluded to, have done the deed which has called forth the
above natural and profound reflections; but, upon the whole, it is
hardly _probable_; for he knew that by doing so he would (first)
irreparably injure society, by depriving it of an enlightened and
invaluable member; (secondly,) inflict great indignity on his precious
body, of which, during life, he had always taken the most affectionate
care, by consigning it to burial in a cross-road, at night-time, with a
stake run through it,[9] and moreover peril the little soul that had
just leaped out of it, by not having any burial-service said over his
aforesaid remains; and (lastly) lose all chance of enjoying Ten Thousand
a-Year--at least upon the earth. I own I was a little startled (as I
dare say was the pensive reader) at a passage of mournful significance
in Mr. Titmouse's last letter to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap,
viz.--"How full of trouble I am, _often thinking of death_, which is the
end of everything;" but on carefully considering the context, I am
disposed to think that the whole was only an astute device of
Titmouse's, either to rouse the fears, or stimulate the feelings, or
excite the hopes of the three arbiters of his destiny to whom it was
addressed. Mr. Gammon, he thought, might be thereby moved to pity; while
Mr. Quirk would probably be operated upon by fears, lest the sad
contingency pointed at might deprive the house of one who would richly
repay their exertions; and by hopes of indefinite advantage, if they
could by any means prevent its happening. That these gentlemen really
_did_ keenly scrutinize, and carefully weigh every expression in that
letter, ridiculous as it was, and contemptible as, I fear, it showed its
writer to be, is certain; but it did not occur to them to compare with
it the spirit, at least, and intention of their own answer to it. Did
the latter document contain less cunning and insincerity, because it was
couched in somewhat superior phraseology? They could conceal their
selfish and over-reaching designs, while poor Titmouse exposed all his
little mean-mindedness and hypocrisy, simply because he had not learned
how to conceal it effectually. 'Twas indeed a battle for the very same
object, but between unequal combatants. Each was trying to _take in_ the
other. If Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap despised and loathed the man
to whom they exhibited such anxious courtesy, Titmouse hated and feared
those whom his interests compelled him for a while to conciliate. Was
there, in fact, a pin to choose between them--except perhaps that
Titmouse was, in a manner, excused by his necessities? But, in the mean
while--to proceed--his circumstances were becoming utterly desperate. He
continued to endure great suffering at Mr. Tag-rag's during the day--the
constant butt of the ridicule and insult of his amiable companions, and
the victim of his employer's vile and vulgar spirit of hatred and
oppression. His spirit, (such as it was,) in short, was very nearly
broken. Though he seized every opportunity that offered, to inquire for
another situation, he was unsuccessful; for all whom he applied to,
spoke of the _strict character_ they should require, "before taking a
new hand into their establishment." His occupation at nights, after
quitting the shop, was twofold only--either to call upon Huckaback,
(whose sympathy, however, he was exhausting rapidly,) or solace his
feelings by walking down to Saffron Hill, and lingering about the closed
office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--there was a kind of
gratification even in that! He once or twice felt flustered even on
catching a glimpse of the old housekeeper returning home with a pint of
porter in her hand. How he would have rejoiced to get into her good
graces, and accompany her into even the kitchen--when he would be on the
premises, at least, and conversing with one of the establishment, of
those who he believed could, with a stroke of their pens, turn this
wilderness of a world into a paradise for him! But he dared not make
any overtures in that quarter, for fear of their getting to the notice
of the dreaded Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap.

At length, no more than three or four shillings stood between him and
utter destitution; and the only person in the world to whom he could
apply for even the most trivial assistance, was Huckaback--whom,
however, he knew to be really little better off than himself; and whom,
moreover, he felt to be treating him more and more coldly, as the week
wore on, without his hearing of any the least tidings from Saffron Hill.
Huckaback evidently felt now scarcely any interest or pleasure in the
visits of his melancholy friend, and was plainly disinclined to talk
about his affairs. At length he quite turned up his nose with disgust,
whenever Titmouse took out the well-worn note of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap, (which was almost dropping in pieces with being constantly
carried about in his pocket, taken in and out, and folded and unfolded,)
for the purpose of conning over its contents, as if there might yet
linger in it some hitherto undiscovered source of consolation. Poor
Titmouse, therefore, looked at it on every such occasion with as eager
and vivid an interest as ever; but it was glanced at by Huckaback with a
half-averted eye, and a cold drawling, yawning "Ya--a--as--I
see--I--dare--say!" While his impressions of Titmouse's bright prospects
were thus being rapidly effaced, his smarting recollections of the
drubbing he had received became more distinct and frequent, his feelings
of resentment more lively, nor the less so, because the expression of
them had been stifled, (while he had considered the star of Titmouse to
be in the ascendant,) till the time for setting them into motion and
action, had gone by. In fact, the presence of Titmouse, suggesting such
thoughts and recollections, became intolerable to Huckaback; and
Titmouse's perceptions (dull as they naturally were, but a little
quickened by recent suffering) gave him more and more distinct notice of
this circumstance, at the precise time when he meditated applying for
the loan of a few shillings. These feelings made him as humble towards
Huckaback, and as tolerant of his increasing rudeness and ill-humor, as
he felt abject towards Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; for, unless he
could succeed in wringing some trifling loan from Huckaback, (if he
really had it in his power to advance him _anything_,) Titmouse really
could not conjecture what was to become of him. Various faint but
unadroit hints and feelers of his had been thrown away upon Huckaback,
who did not, or would not, comprehend them. At length, however, a sudden
and fearful pressure compelled poor Titmouse to speak out. Gripe, the
collector, called one morning for the poor's rates due from Mrs.
Squallop, and drained her of almost every penny of ready money which she
had by her. This threw the good woman upon her resources to replenish
her empty pocket--and down she came upon Titmouse--or rather, up she
went to him; for his heart sank within him, one night on his return from
the shop, having only just taken off his hat and lit his candle, as he
heard the fat old termagant's well-known heavy step ascending the
stairs, and approaching nearer and nearer to his door. Her loud
imperative single knock vibrated through his very heart.

"Oh, Mrs. Squallop! How d'ye do, Mrs. Squallop?" commenced Titmouse,
faintly, when he had opened the door; "Won't you take a chair?" with
trepidation offering to the panting dame almost the only chair he had.

"No--I a'n't come to stay, Mr. Titmouse, because, d'ye see, in coorse
you've got a pound, _at least_, ready for me, as you promised long
ago--and never more welcome; there's old Gripe been here to-day, and had
his hodious rates--(drat the poor, say I! them as can't work should
starve!--rates is a robbery!)--but howsomdever he's cleaned _me_ out
to-day; so, in coorse, I come up to _you_. Got it, Mr. Titmouse?"

"I--I--I--'pon my life, Mrs. Squallop, I'm uncommon sorry"----

"Oh, bother your sorrow, Mr. Titmouse!--out with the needful, for I
can't stop palavering here."

"I--I can't, so help me----!" gasped Titmouse, with the calmness of
desperation.

"You can't! And marry, sir, why not, may I make bold to ask?" inquired
Mrs. Squallop, after a moment's pause, striving to choke down her rage.

"P'r'aps you can get blood out of a stone, Mrs. Squallop; it's what _I_
can't," replied Titmouse, striving to screw his courage up to the
sticking place, to encounter one who was plainly bent upon mischief.
"I've got two shillings--there they are," throwing them on the table;
"and cuss me if I've another rap in the world; there, ma'am! take 'em,
do; and drive me desperate!"

"You're a liar, then, that's flat!" exclaimed Mrs. Squallop, slapping
her hand upon the table, with a violence that made the candle quiver on
it, and almost fall down. "_You_ have the _himperance_," said she,
sticking her arms akimbo, and commencing the address she had been
preparing in her own mind ever since Mr. Gripe had quitted her house,
"to stand there and tell me you've got nothing in the world but them
_two shillings_! Heugh! Out on you, you oudacious fellow!--you
jack-a-dandy! _You_ tell me you haven't got more than them two
shillings, and yet turns out every Sunday morning of your life like a
lord, with your pins, and your rings, and your chains, and your fine
coat, and your gloves, and your spurs, and your dandy cane--ough! you
whipper-snapper! You're a cheat--you're a swindler, jack-a-dandy! You're
the contempt of the whole court, you are--you jack-a-dandy! You've got
all my rent on your back, and so you've had every Sunday for three
months, you cheat!--you low fellow!--you ungrateful chap! You're
a-robbing the widow and fatherless! Look at me, and my six fatherless
children down there, you good-for-nothing, nasty, proud puppy!--eugh! it
makes me sick to see you. _You_ dress yourself out like my lord mayor!
You've bought a gold chain with my rent, you rascally cheat! _You_ dress
yourself out?--Ha, ha!--you're a nasty, mean-looking, humpty-dumpty,
carroty-headed"----

"You'd better not say _that_ again, Mrs. Squallop," quoth Titmouse, with
a fierce glance.

"Not say it again!--ha, ha! Hoighty-toighty, carroty-haired
jack-a-dandy!--Why, you hop-o-my-thumb! d'ye think I won't say whatever
I choose, and in my own house, and to a man that can't pay his rent?
You're a Titmouse by name and by nature; there a'n't a cockroach
crawling in our kitchen that a'n't more harmless than you!--You're a
himperant cheat, and dandy, and knave, and a liar, and a red-haired
rascal--and _that_ in your teeth! (snapping her fingers.) Ough! Your
name stinks in the court. You're a-taking of everybody in as will trust
you to a penny's amount. There's poor old Cox, the tailor, with a sick
wife and children, whom you've cheated this many months, all of his not
having sperrit to summons you! But _I'll_ set him upon you; you see if I
don't--and I'll have my own, too, or I wouldn't give _that_ for the
laws!" shouted Mrs. Squallop, again furiously snapping her fingers in
his face; and then pausing for breath after her eloquent invective.

"Now, what _is_ the use," said Titmouse, gently, being completely
cowed--"now, what good _can_ it do to go on in this way, Mrs. Squallop?"

"Missus me no missus, Mr. Titmouse, but pay me my rent, you
jack-a-dandy! You've got my rent on your back, and on your little
finger; and I'll have it off you before I've done with you, I warrant
you. I'm your landlady, and I'll sell you up; I'll have old Thumbscrew
here the first thing in the morning, and distrain everything, and you,
too, you jackdaw, if any one would buy you, which they won't! I'll have
my rent at last: I've been too easy with you, you ungrateful chap; for,
mark, even Gripe this morning says, 'Haven't you a gentleman lodger up
above? get him to pay you your own,' says he; and so I will. I'm sick of
all this, and I'll have my rights! Here's my son, Jem, a far
better-looking chap than you, though he _hasn't_ got hair like a sandy
mop all under his chin, and he's obligated for to work from one week's
end to another, in a paper cap and fustian jacket; and you--you painted
jackanapes! But now I have got you, and I'll turn you inside out, though
I know there's nothing in you! But I'll try to get at your fine coats,
and spurs, and trousers, your chains and pins, and make something of
them before I've done with you, you jack-a-dandy!"--and the virago shook
her fist at him, looking as though she had not yet uttered even half
that was in her heart towards him.

[Alas, alas, unhappy Titmouse, much-enduring son of sorrow! I perceive
that you now feel the sharpness of an angry female tongue; and indeed to
me, not in the least approving of the many coarse and heart-splitting
expressions which she uses, it seems, nevertheless, that she hath not
gone exceeding far off the mark in much that she hath said; for, in
truth, in your conduct there is not a little that to me, piteously
inclined towards you as I am, yet appeareth obnoxious to the edge of
this woman's reproaches. But think not, O bewildered and
not-with-sufficient-distinctness-discerning-the-nature-of-things
Titmouse! that she hath only a sharp and bitter tongue. In this woman
behold a mother, and it may be that she will soften before you, who
have plainly, as I hear, neither father nor mother. Oh me!]

Poor Titmouse trembled violently; his lips quivered; and the long
pent-up tears forced their way at length over his eyelids, and fell fast
down his cheeks.

"Ah, you may well cry!--you may! But it's too late!--it's my turn to cry
now! Don't you think that I feel for my own flesh and blood, which is my
six children? And isn't what's mine theirs? And aren't you keeping the
fatherless out of their own? It's too bad of you--it is! and you know it
is," continued Mrs. Squallop, vehemently.

"_They've_ got a mother--a kind--good--mother--to take--care of them,"
sobbed Titmouse; "but there's been no one in the--the--world that cares
a straw for _me_--this twenty--years!" He fairly wept aloud.

"Well, then, more's the pity for _you_. If you had, they wouldn't have
let you make such a puppy of yourself--and at your landlady's expense,
too. You know you're a fool," said Mrs. Squallop, dropping her voice a
little; for she was a MOTHER, after all, and she knew that what poor
Titmouse had just stated was quite true. She tried hard to feed the fire
of her wrath, by forcing into her thoughts every aggravating topic
against Titmouse that she could think of; but it became every moment
harder and harder to do so, for she was consciously softening rapidly
towards the weeping and miserable little object, on whom she had been
heaping such violent and bitter abuse. He was a great fool, to be
sure--he was very fond of fine clothes--- he knew no better--he had,
however, paid his rent well enough till lately--he was a very quiet,
well-disposed lodger, for all _she_ had known--he had given her
youngest, child a pear not long ago. Really, thought Mrs. Squallop, I
may have gone a _leetle_ too far.

"Come--it a'n't no use crying in this way," she began in an altered
tone. "It won't put money into your pocket, nor my rent into mine. You
know you've wronged me, and I _must_ be paid," she added, but in a still
lower tone. She tried to cough away a certain rising disagreeable
sensation about her throat; for Titmouse, having turned his back to hide
the extent of his emotions, seemed half-choked with suppressed sobs.

"So you won't speak a word--not a word--to the woman you've injured so
much?" inquired Mrs. Squallop, trying to assume a harsh tone; but her
eyes were a little obstructed with tears.

"I--I--_can't_ speak," sobbed Titmouse--"I--I feel ready to drop into a
cold early grave!--everybody hates me"--here he paused; and for some
moments neither of them spoke. "I've been kept on my legs the whole day
about the town by Mr. Tag-rag, and had no dinner. I--I--wish I was
_dead_! I do!--you may take all I have--here it is," continued Titmouse,
with his foot pushing towards Mrs. Squallop the old hair trunk that
contained all his little finery. "I sha'n't want them much longer, for
I'm turned out of my situation."

This was too much for Mrs. Squallop, and she was obliged to wipe her
full eyes with the corner of her apron, without saying a word. Her heart
smote her for the misery she had inflicted on one who seemed quite
broken down. Pity suddenly flew, fluttering his wings--soft dove!--into
her heart, and put to flight in an instant all her enraged feelings.
"Come, Mr. Titmouse," said she, in quite an altered tone, "never mind
_me_; I'm a plain-spoken woman enough, I dare say--and often say more
than I mean--for I know I a'n't over particular when my blood's
up--but--lord!--I--I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head, poor chap!--for
all I've said--no, not for double the rent you owe me. Come! don't go
on so, Mr. Titmouse--what's the use?--it's all quite--over--I'm _so_
sorry--Lud! if I had _really_ thought"--she almost sobbed--"you'd been
so--so--why, I'd have waited till to-morrow night before I'd said a
word. But, Mr. Titmouse, since you haven't had any dinner, won't you
have a mouthful of something--a bit of bread and cheese I--I'll soon
fetch you up a bit, and a drop of beer--we've just had it in for our
suppers."

"No, thank you--I can't--I can't eat!" sobbed Titmouse.

"Oh, bother it, but you _shall_! I'll go down and fetch it up in half a
minute, as sure as my name's Squallop!" And out of the room and
down-stairs she bustled, glad of a moment to recover herself.

"Lord-a-mercy!" said she, on entering her room, to her eldest daughter
and a neighbor who had just come in to supper--and while she hastily cut
a thick hunch of bread, and a good slice of cheese--"there I've been
a-rating that poor little chap, up at the top room, (my dandy lodger,
you know,) like anything--and I really don't think he's had a morsel of
victuals in his belly this precious day; and I've made him cry, poor
soul! as if his heart would break. Pour us out half a pint of that beer,
Sally--a _good_ half pint, mind!--I'm going to take it up-stairs
directly. I've gone a deal too far with him, I do think; but it's all of
that nasty old Gripe; I've been wrong all the day through it! How I hate
the sight of old Gripe! What _hodious_ looking people they do get to
collect the rates and taxes, to be sure!--Poor chap," she continued, as
she wiped out a plate with her apron, and put into it the bread and
cheese, together with a knife--"he offered me a chair when I went in, so
uncommon civil-like, it took a good while before I could get myself into
the humor to _give it_ him as I wanted. And he's no father nor mother,
(half of which has happened to _you_, Sal, and the rest will happen one
of these days, you know--so you mind me while you have me!) and he's not
such a very bad lodger, after all, though he _does_ get a little
behind-hand now and then, and though he turns out every Sunday like a
lord, poor fool--as your poor dear father used to say, 'with a shining
back and empty belly.'"

"But that's no reason why honest people should be kept out of their own,
to feed his pride," interposed her neighbor, a skinny old widow, who had
never had chick nor child, and was always behind-hand with her own rent;
but whose effects were not worth distraining upon. "I'd get hold of some
of his fine crincum-crancums and gimcracks, for security like, if I was
you. I would, indeed."

"Why--no, poor soul--I don't hardly like: he's a vain creature, and puts
everything he can on his back, to be sure; but he a'n't quite a _rogue_,
neither."

"Ah, ha, Mrs. Squallop--you're such a simple soul!--Won't my fine
gentleman make off with his finery after to-night?"

"Well, I shouldn't have thought it! To be sure he may! Really, there
_can't_ be much harm in asking him (in a proper kind of way) to deposit
one of his fine things with me, by way of security--that ring of his,
you know--eh?--Well, I'll _try_ it anyhow," said Mrs. Squallop, as she
set off up-stairs.

"I know what _I_ should do, if so be he was a lodger of _mine_, that's
all," said her visitor, significantly, (as Mrs. Squallop quitted the
room,) vexed to find her supper so considerably and unexpectedly
diminished, especially as to the pot of porter, which she strongly
suspected would not be replenished.

"There," said Mrs. Squallop, setting down on the table what she had
brought for Titmouse, "there's a bit of supper for you; and you're
welcome to it, I'm sure, Mr. Titmouse."

"Thank you, thank you--I can't eat," said he, casting, however, upon the
victuals a hungry eye, which belied what he said, while in his heart he
longed to be left alone with them for about three minutes.

"Come, don't be ashamed--fall to work--it's good wholesome victuals,"
said she, lifting the table near to the edge of the bed, on the side of
which he was sitting, and taking up the two shillings lying on the
table--"and capital good beer, I warrant me; you'll sleep like a top
after it."

"You're uncommon kind, Mrs. Squallop; but I sha'n't get a wink of sleep
to-night for thinking"----

"Oh, bother your thinking! Let me begin to see you eat a bit. Well, I
suppose you don't like to eat and drink before me, so I'll go." [Here
arose a sudden conflict in the good woman's mind, whether or not she
would act on the suggestion which had been put into her head
down-stairs. She was on the point of yielding to the impulse of her own
good-natured, though coarse feelings; but at last--] "I--I--dare say,
Mr. Titmouse, you mean what's right and straightforward," she stammered.

"Yes, Mrs. Squallop--you may keep those two shillings; they're the last
farthing I have left in the whole world."

"No--hem!--hem!--ahem! I was just suddenly a-thinking--now can't you
guess, Mr. Titmouse?"

"What, Mrs. Squallop?" inquired Titmouse, meekly but anxiously.

"Why--suppose now--if it were only to raise ten shillings with old
Balls, round the corner, on one of those fine things of yours--your
ring, say!" [Titmouse's heart sank within him.] "Well, well--never
mind--don't fear," said Mrs. Squallop, observing him suddenly turn pale
again. "I--I only thought--but never mind! it don't signify--good-night!
we can talk about that to-morrow--good-night--a good night's rest to
you, Mr. Titmouse!" and the next moment he heard her heavy step
descending the stairs. Some little time elapsed before he could recover
from the agitation into which he had been thrown by her last proposal;
but within five minutes of her quitting the room, there stood before
him, on the table, an _empty_ plate and jug.




CHAPTER IV.


"The beast! the fat old toad!" thought he, the instant that he had
finished masticating what had been supplied to him by real charity and
good-nature--"the vulgar wretch!--the nasty canting old hypocrite!--I
saw what she was driving at all the while!--she had her eye on my
ring!--She'd have me pawn it at old Balls's--ha, ha!--Catch me! that's
all!--Seven shillings a-week for this nasty hole!--I'll be bound I pay
nearly half the rent of the whole house--the old cormorant!--out of what
she gets from me! How I hate her! More than half my salary goes into her
greasy pocket! Cuss me if I couldn't have kicked her
down-stairs--porter, bread and cheese, and all--while she was standing
canting there!--A snivelling old beldam!--Pawn my ring!!--Lord!!"--Here
he began to undress. "Ha! I'm up to her; she'll be coming here
to-morrow, with that devil Thumbscrew, to distrain, I'll be sworn.
Well--I'll take care of _these_ anyhow;" and, kneeling down and
unlocking his trunk, he took out of it his guard-chain, breast-pin,
studs, and ring, carefully folded them up in paper, and depositing them
in his trousers' pockets, resolved that henceforth their nightly
resting-place should be--under his pillow; while during the day they
should accompany his person whithersoever he went. Next he bethought
himself of the two or three important papers to which Mr. Gammon had
referred; and, with tremulous eagerness, read them over once or twice,
but without being able to extract from them the slightest clew to their
real character and bearing. Then he folded them up in a half sheet of
writing-paper, which he proceeded to stitch carefully beneath the lining
of his waistcoat; after which he blew out his slim candle, and with a
heavy sigh got into bed. For some moments after he had blown out the
candle did the image of it remain on his aching and excited retina; and
just so long did the thoughts of _ten thousand a-year_ dwell on his
fancy, fading, however, quickly away amid the thickening gloom of
doubts, and fears, and miseries, which oppressed him. There he lies,
stretched on his bed, a wretched figure, lying on his breast, his head
buried beneath his feverish arms. Anon, he turns round upon his back,
stretches his wearied limbs to their uttermost, folds his arms on his
breast, then buries them beneath the pillow, under his head. Now he
turns on his right side, then on his left--presently he starts up, and
with muttered curse shakes his little pillow, flinging it down angrily.
He cannot sleep--he cannot rest--he cannot keep still. Bursting with
irritability, he gets out of bed, and steps to the window, which opening
wide, a slight gush of fresh air cools his hot face for a moment or two.
His wearied eye looks upward and beholds the moon shining overhead in
cold splendor, turning the clouds to gold as they flit past her, and
shedding a softened lustre upon the tiled roofs and irregular
chimney-pots--the only objects visible to him. No sound is heard, but
occasionally the dismal cry of disappointed cat, the querulous voice of
the watchman, and the echo of the rumbling hubbub of Oxford Street. O
miserable Titmouse! of what avail is it for thee thus to fix thy
sorrowful lack-lustre eye upon the cold Queen of Night!

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment there happened to be also gazing at the same glorious
object, but at some two hundred miles' distance from London, a very
different person, with very different feelings, and in very different
circumstances. It was one of the angels of the earth--a pure-hearted and
very beautiful girl; who, after a day of peaceful, innocent, and
charitable employment, and having just quitted the piano, where her
exquisite strains had soothed and delighted the feelings of her brother,
harassed with political anxieties, had retired to her chamber for the
night. A few moments before she was presented to the reader, she had
extinguished her taper, and dismissed her maid without her having
discharged more than half her accustomed duties--telling her that she
should finish undressing by the light of the moon, which then poured her
soft radiance into every corner of the spacious but old-fashioned
chamber. Then she drew her chair to the window-recess, and pushing open
the window, sat before it, only partially undressed as she was, her hair
dishevelled, her head leaning on her hand, gazing upon the scenery
before her with tranquil admiration. Silence reigned absolutely. Not a
sound issued from the ancient groves, which spread far and wide on all
sides of the fine old mansion in which she dwelt--solemn solitudes, nor
yet less soothing than solemn! Was not the solitude enhanced by a
glimpse she caught of a restless fawn, glancing in the distance across
the avenue, as he silently changed the tree under which he slept?--Then
the gentle breeze would enter her window, laden with sweet scents of
which he had just been rifling the coy flowers beneath, in their dewy
repose, tended and petted during the day by her own delicate
hand!--Beautiful moon!--cold and chaste in thy skyey palace, studded
with brilliant and innumerable gems, and shedding down thy rich and
tender radiance upon this lovely seclusion--was there upon the whole
earth a more exquisite countenance then turned towards thee than
hers?--Wrap thy white robe, dearest Kate, closer round thy fair bosom,
lest the amorous night-breeze do thee hurt, for he groweth giddy with
the sight of thy charms! Thy rich tresses, half-uncurled, are growing
damp--- so it is time that thy blue eyes should seek repose. Hie thee,
then, my love!--to yon antique couch, with its quaint carvings and satin
draperies dimly visible in the dusky shade, inviting thee to sleep: and
having first bent in cheerful reverence before thy Maker--to bed!--to
bed!--sweet Kate, nothing disturbing thy serene slumbers, or agitating
that beautiful bosom.--Hush! hush!--now she sleeps! It is well that
thine eyes are closed in sleep; for BEHOLD--see!--the brightness without
is disappearing; sadness and gloom are settling on the face of nature;
the tranquil night is changing her aspect; clouds are gathering, winds
are moaning; the moon is gone:--but sleep on, sweet Kate--sleep on,
dreaming not of dark days before thee--Oh, that thou couldst sleep on
till the brightness returned!

       *       *       *       *       *

After having stood thus leaning against the window for nearly half an
hour, Titmouse, heavily sighing, returned to bed--but there he tossed
about in wretched restlessness till nearly four o'clock in the morning.
If he now and then sank into forgetfulness for a while, it was only to
be harassed by the dreadful image of Mrs. Squallop, shouting at him,
tearing his hair, cuffing him, flinging a pot of porter in his face,
opening his boxes, tossing his clothes about, taking out his invaluable
ornaments; by Tag-rag kicking him out of the shop; and Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap dashing past him in a fine carriage, with six horses,
and paying no attention to him as he ran shouting and breathless after
him; Huckaback following, kicking and pinching him behind. These were
the few little bits of different colored glass in a mental kaleidoscope,
which, turned capriciously round, produced those innumerable fantastic
combinations out of the simple and ordinary events of the day, which we
call _dreams_--tricks of the wild sisters Fancy, when sober Reason has
left her seat for a while. But this is fitter for the Royal Society than
the bedroom of Tittlebat Titmouse; and I beg the reader's pardon.

About six o'clock, Titmouse rose and dressed himself; and, slipping
noiselessly and swiftly down-stairs, and out of the court, in order to
avoid all possibility of encountering his landlady or his tailor, soon
found himself in Oxford Street. Not many people were stirring there. One
or two men who passed him were smoking their morning's pipe, with a
half-awakened air, as if they had only just got out of a snug bed, in
which they always slept every moment that they lay upon it. Titmouse
almost envied them! What a squalid figure he looked, as he paced up and
down, till at length he saw the porter of Messrs. Tag-rag & Co. opening
the shop-door. He soon entered it, and commenced another jocund day in
that delightful establishment. The amiable Mr. Tag-rag continued
unaltered.

"You're at liberty to take yourself off, sir, this very day--this
moment, sir; and a good riddance," said he, bitterly, during the course
of the day, after demanding of Titmouse how he dared to give himself
such sullen airs; "and then we shall see how charming easy it is for
gents like you to get another sitiwation, sir! Your looks and manner is
quite a recommendation, sir! If I was you, sir, I'd raise my terms!
You're worth double what I give, sir!" Titmouse made no reply. "What do
you mean, sir, by not answering me--eh, sir?" suddenly demanded Mr.
Tag-rag, with a look of fury.

"I don't know what you'd have me say, sir. What am I to say, sir?"
inquired Titmouse, with a sigh.

"What, indeed! I should like to catch you! Say, indeed! Only say a
word--and out you go, neck and crop. Attend to that old lady coming in,
sir. And mind, sir, I've got my eye on you!" Titmouse did as he was bid;
and Tag-rag, a bland smile suddenly beaming on his attractive features,
hurried down towards the door, to receive some lady-customers, whom he
observed alighting from a carriage; and at that moment you would have
sworn that he was one of the kindest-hearted sweetest-tempered men in
the world.

When at length _this_ day had come to a close, Titmouse, instead of
repairing to his lodgings, set off, with a heavy heart, to pay a visit
to his excellent friend Huckaback, whom he knew to have received his
quarter's salary the day before, and from whom he faintly hoped to
succeed in extorting some trifling loan. "If you want to learn the value
of money, _try to borrow some_," says Poor Richard--and Titmouse was now
going to learn that useful but bitter lesson. Oh, how disheartening was
Mr. Huckaback's reception of him! That gentleman, in answering the
modest knock of Titmouse, suspecting who was his visitor, opened the
door but a little way, and in that little way, with his hand on the
latch, he stood, with a plainly repulsive look.

"Oh! it's you, Titmouse, is it?" he commenced coldly.

"Yes. I--I just want to speak a word to you--only a word or two, Hucky,
if you aren't busy?"

"Why, I was just going to go--but what d'ye want, Titmouse?" he inquired
in a freezing manner, not stirring from where he stood.

"_Let_ me come inside a minute," implored Titmouse, feeling as if his
little heart were really dropping out of him: and, in a most ungracious
manner, Huckaback motioned him in.

"Well," commenced Huckaback, with a chilling distrustful look.

"Why, Huck, I know you're a good-natured chap--you _couldn't_, just for
a short time, lend me ten shill"----

"No, curse me if I can: and that's flat!" briskly interrupted Huckaback,
finding his worst suspicions confirmed.

"Why, Hucky, wasn't you only yesterday paid your salary?"

"Well!--suppose I was?--what then? You're a monstrous cool hand,
Titmouse! I never!! So I'm to lend to you, when I'm starving myself!
I've received such a lot, too, haven't I?"

"I thought we'd always been friends, Hucky," said Titmouse, faintly;
"and so we shouldn't mind helping one another a bit! Don't you remember,
I once lent you half-a-crown?"

"Half-a-crown!--and that's nine months ago!"

"Do, Hucky, do lend me a few shillings. 'Pon my soul, I've not a
sixpence in the whole world."

"Ha, ha! A pretty chap to borrow! You can pay so well! By George,
Titmouse, you're a cool hand!"

"If you won't lend me, I must starve."

"Go to _my uncle's_." [Titmouse groaned aloud.] "Well--and why not? What
of that?" continued Huckaback, sharply and bitterly. "I dare say it
wouldn't be the first time you've done such a trick no more than me.
I've been obligated to do it. Why shouldn't you? A'n't there that ring?"

"Oh, Lord! oh, Lord! that's just what Mrs. Squallop said last night!"

"Whew! _She's_ down on you, is she? And you have the face to come to
me!! _You_--that's a-going to be sold up, come to borrow! Lord, that's
good, anyhow! A queer use that to make of one's friends;--it's a taking
them in, I say!"

"Oh, Huck, Huck, if you only knew what a poor devil"----

"Yes, that's what I was a-saying; but it a'n't 'poor devils' one lends
money to so easily, I warrant me; though you _a'n't_ such a poor
devil--you're only shamming! Where's your guard-chain, your studs, your
breast-pin, your ring, and all that? Sell 'em! if not, anyhow, _pawn_
'em. Can't eat your cake and have it; fine back must have empty belly
with us sort of chaps."

"If you'll only be so uncommon kind as to lend me--this once--ten
shillings," continued Titmouse, in an imploring tone, "I'll bind myself,
by a solemn oath, to pay you the very first moment I get what's due to
me from Tag-rag & Co."---- Here he was almost choked by the sudden
recollection that he had next to nothing to receive.

"You've some property in the MOON, too, that's coming to you, you know!"
said Huckaback, with an insulting sneer.

"I know what you're driving at," said poor Titmouse; and he continued
eagerly, "and if anything _should_ ever come up from Messrs. Quirk,
Gam"----

"Yough! Faugh! Pish! Stuff!" burst out Huckaback, in a tone of contempt
and disgust; "_never_ thought there was anything in it, and now _know_
it! It's all my eye, and all that! You've been only humbugging me all
this while!"

"Oh, Hucky, Hucky! You don't say so!" groaned Titmouse, bursting into
tears; "you did not _always_ say so."

"It's enough that I say it _now_, then; will that do?" interrupted
Huckaback, impetuously.

"Oh, Lord, Lord! what is to become of me?" cried Titmouse, with a face
full of anguish.

[At this moment, the following was the course of thought passing through
the mind of Mr. Huckaback:--It is not _certain_ that nothing will come
of the fellow's affair with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. It was
hardly likely that they would have gone as far as Titmouse represented,
(lawyers as they were), unless they had seen very substantial grounds
for doing so. Besides, even though Titmouse might not get ten thousand
a-year, he might yet succeed in obtaining a very splendid sum of money:
and if he (Huckaback) could but get a little slice out of it, Titmouse
was now nearly desperate, and would promise anything; and if he could
but be wheedled into giving anything in writing--Well, thought
Huckaback, I'll try it however!]

"Ah, Titmouse, you're civil enough _now_, and would _promise_ anything,"
said Huckaback, appearing to hesitate; "but supposing I were to do what
you want, when you got your money you'd forget everything about it"----

"Forget my promise! Dear Hucky! only try me--do try me but once, that's
all! 'Pon my precious life, ten shillings is worth more to me now than a
hundred pounds may be by-and-by."

"Ay, so you say _now_; but d'ye mean to tell me, that in case I _was_
now to advance you ten shillings out of my small salary," continued
Huckaback, apparently carelessly, "you'd, for instance, pay me a hundred
pounds out of your thousands?"

"Oh, Lord! only you try me--do try me!" said Titmouse, eagerly.

"Oh, I dare say!" interrupted Huckaback, smiling incredulously, and
chinking some money in his trousers pocket. Titmouse heard it, and (as
the phrase is) his teeth watered; and he immediately swore such a
tremendous oath as I dare not set down in writing, that if Huckaback
would that evening lend him ten shillings, Titmouse would give him one
hundred pounds out of the very first moneys he got from the estate.

"Ten shillings is a slapping slice out of my little salary--I shall
have, by George, to go without lots of things I'd intended getting; it's
really worth ten pounds to me, just now."

"Why, dear Hucky! 'pon my life, 't is worth a hundred to _me_! Mrs.
Squallop will sell me out, bag and baggage, if I don't give her
something to-morrow!"

"Well, if I really thought--hem!--would you mind giving me, now, a bit
of black and white for it--just (as one might say) to show you was in
earnest?"

"I'll do anything you like; only let me feel the ten shillings in my
fingers!"

"Well, no sooner said than done, if you're a man of your word," said
Huckaback, in a trice producing a bit of paper, and a pen and ink. "So,
only just for the fun of it; but--Lord! what stuff!--I'm only bargaining
for a hundred pounds of moonshine. Ha, ha! I shall never see the color
of your money, not I; so I may as well say two hundred when I'm about
it, as one hundred"----

"Why, hem! Two hundred, Huck, _is_ rather a large figure; one hundred's
odds enough, I'm sure!" quoth Titmouse, meekly.

"P'r'aps, Tit, you forget the _licking_ you gave me the other day," said
Huckaback, with sudden sternness. "Suppose I was to go to an attorney,
and get the law of you, what a sight of damages I should have--three
hundred pounds at least!"

Titmouse appeared even yet hesitating.

"Well, then!" said Huckaback, flinging down his pen, "suppose I have
them damages yet"----

"Come, come, Hucky, 't is all past and gone, all that"--

"Is it? Well, I never! I shall never be again the same man I was before
that 'ere licking. I've a sort of a--a--of a--feeling inside, as if--my
breast was--I shall carry it to my grave--curse me if I sha'n't!"

[It never once occurred to Titmouse, not having his friend Mr. Gammon at
his elbow, that the plaintiff in the action of _Huckaback v. Titmouse_
might have been slightly at a loss for a _witness_ of the assault; but
something quite as good in its way--a heaven-sent suggestion--_did_
occur to him.]

"Ah," said Titmouse, suddenly, "that's true; and uncommon sorry am I;
but still, a hundred pounds is a hundred pounds, and a large sum for the
use of ten shillings, and a licking; but never you think it's all
moonshine about my business with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap! I
didn't intend to have said a word--but--you should only have heard what
_I've_ heard to-day from those gents; hem! but I won't split _again_
either!" he added mysteriously.

"Eh? What? Heard from those gents at Saffron Hill?" interrupted
Huckaback, briskly; "come, Titty, out with it--out with it; no secrets
between friends, Titty!"

"No, I'll be hanged if I do--I won't spoil it all again; and now, since
I've let out as much, which I didn't mean to do, I'll tell you something
else--ten shillings is no use to me, I must have a pound."

"Titty, Titty!" exclaimed Huckaback, with unaffected concern.

"And I won't give more than fifty for it when I get my property
either"---- [Huckaback whistled aloud, and with a significant air
buttoned up the pocket which contained the money; intimating that now
the negotiation was all at an end, for that Titmouse's new terms were
quite out of the question;] "for I know where I can get twenty pounds
easily, only I liked to come to a _friend_ first."

"You aren't behaving much like a friend to one as has always been a fast
friend of yours, Titty! _A pound!_--I haven't got it to part with,
that's flat; so, if that's really your lowest figure, why, you must even
go to your other friend, and leave poor Hucky!"

"Well, I don't mind saying only ten shillings," quoth Titmouse, fearing
that he had been going on _rather_ too fast.

"Ah, that's something reasonable-like, Titty! and to meet you like a
friend, I'll take fifty pounds instead of a hundred; but you won't
object now to--you know--a deposit; that ring of yours--well, well! it
don't signify, since it goes against you; so now, here goes, a bit of
paper for ten shillings, ha, ha!" and taking a pen, after a pause, in
which he called to mind as much of the phraseology of money securities
as he could, he drew up the following stringent document, which I give
_verbatim et literatim_:--

     "_Know all Men_ That you are bound to _Mr. R. Huckaback_ Promising
     the Bearer (on _Demand_) To Pay Fifty Pounds in cash out of the
     estate, _if you Get it_. (Value received.)

     "(Witness,) 22d July 18--.

     "R. HUCKABACK."

"There, Titty--if you're an honest man, and would do as you would be
done by," said Huckaback, after signing his own name as above, handing
the pen to Titmouse, "sign that; just to show your honor, like--for in
course--bating the ten shillings I've lent you--I sha'n't ever come on
you for the money--get as much as you may."

A blessed thought occurred to poor Titmouse in his extremity, viz. that
there was _no stamp_ on the above instrument, (and he had never seen a
promissory-note or bill of exchange without one;) and he signed it
instantly, with many fervent expressions of gratitude. Huckaback
received the valuable security with apparently a careless air; and after
cramming it into his pocket, as if it had been in reality only a bit of
waste paper, counted out ten shillings into the eager hand of Titmouse;
who, having thus most unexpectedly succeeded in his mission, soon
afterwards departed--each of this pair of worthies fancying that he had
succeeded in cheating the other. Huckaback, having very cordially shaken
Titmouse by the hand, heartily damned him upon shutting the door on him;
and then anxiously perused and re-perused his "security," wondering
whether it was possible for Titmouse at any time thereafter to evade it,
and considering by what means he could acquaint himself with the
progress of Titmouse's affairs. The latter gentleman, as he hurried
homeward, dwelt for a long while upon only one thought--how fortunate
was the omission of his friend to have a stamp upon his security! When
and where, thought he, was it that he had heard that nothing would do
without a stamp? However, he had got the ten shillings safe; and
Huckaback might wait for his fifty pounds till--but in the meanwhile he,
Titmouse, seemed to stand a fair chance of going to the dogs; the ten
shillings, which he had just obtained with so much difficulty, were to
find their way immediately into the pockets of his landlady, whom it
might pacify for a day or two, and to what quarter was he now to look
for the smallest assistance? What was to become of him? Titmouse was a
miserable fool; but thoughts such as these, in such circumstances as
his, would have forced themselves into the mind of even a fool! How
could he avoid--oh, horrid thought!--soon parting with, or at least
pawning, his ring and his other precious trinkets? He burst into a
perspiration at the mere thought of seeing them hanging ticketed for
sale in the window of old Balls! As he slowly ascended the stairs which
led to his apartment, he felt as if he were following some unseen
conductor to a dungeon.

He was not aware that all this while, although he heard nothing from
them, he occupied almost exclusively the thoughts of those distinguished
practitioners in the law, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. They, in
common with Huckaback, had an intense desire to share in his anticipated
good fortune, and determined to do so according to their opportunities.
The excellent Huckaback (a model of an usurer on a small scale) had
promptly and adroitly seized hold of the very first opportunity that
presented itself, for securing a little return hereafter for the ten
shillings, with which he had so generously parted when he could so ill
afford it; while Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap were racking their
brains, and from time to time, those of Messrs. Mortmain and
Frankpledge, to discover some instrument strong and large enough to cut
a fat slice for themselves out of the fortune they were endeavoring, for
that purpose, to put within the reach of Mr. Titmouse. A rule of three
mode of stating the matter would be thus: as the inconvenience of
Huckaback's parting with his ten shillings and his waiver of damages for
a very cruel assault, were to his contingent gain, hereafter, of fifty
pounds; so were Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's risk, exertions,
outlay, and benefit conferred on Titmouse, to their contingent gain of
ten thousand pounds. The principal point of difference between them
was--as to the mode of _securing_ their future recompense; in which it
may have been observed by the attentive reader, with respect to the
precipitancy of Huckaback and the hesitating caution of Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, that--"_thus fools_" (_e. g._ Huckaback) "_rushed in
where angels_" (_i. e._ Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap) "_feared to
tread_." Let me not, however, for a moment, insinuate that both these
parties were actuated by only one motive, _i. e._ to make a prey of this
little monkey _millionnaire_ that was to be. 'Tis true that Huckaback
appears to have driven rather a hard bargain with his distressed friend,
(and almost every one who, being similarly situated, has occasion for
such services as Titmouse sought from Huckaback, will find himself
called upon to pay, in one way or another, pretty nearly the same price
for them;) but it was attended with one good effect;--for the specific
interest in Titmouse's future prosperity, acquired by Huckaback,
quickened the latter gentleman's energies and sharpened his wits in the
service of his friend. But for this, indeed, it is probable that Mr.
Huckaback's door would have become as hopelessly closed against Titmouse
as was that of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. Some two or three nights
after the little transaction between the two friends which I have been
describing, Huckaback called upon Titmouse, and after greeting him
rather cordially, told him that he had come to put him up to a trick
upon the Saffron Hill people, that would tickle them into a little
activity in his affairs. The trick was--the sending a letter to those
gentlemen calculated to--but why attempt to characterize it? I have the
original document lying before me, which was sent by Titmouse the very
next morning to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and here follows a
_verbatim_ copy of it:--

                                   "_No. 9, Closet Court, Oxford Street._

     "_To Messrs._ QUERK & CO.

     "Gents,--Am Sorry _to_ Trouble You, But Being _Drove quite
     desperate_ at my Troubles (which have bro^t me to my Last Penny a
     Week ago) and Mrs. Squallop my Landlady w^d distrain on Me only
     that There Is nothing to distrain on, Am Determined to Go Abroad in
     a Week's Time, and shall Never come Any More back again with Great
     Grief w^h Is What I now Write To tell You Of (Hoping you will
     please Take No notice of It) So Need give Yourselves No Further
     Concern with my Concerns Seeing The Estate is Not To Be Had and Am
     Sorry you Sh^d Have Had so Much trouble with My Affairs w^h c^d not
     Help. Sh^d have Much liked The Thing, only it Was Not worth
     Stopping For, or Would, but Since It Was not God's Will be Done
     _which it Will_. Hav^g raised a Trifle On my Future Prospects (w^h
     am Certain There is Nothing In) from a _True Friend_" [need it be
     guessed at whose instance these words had found their way into the
     letter?] "w^h was certainly uncommon inconvenient to That Person
     But He w^d do Anything to Do me good As he says Am going to raise A
     Little More from a Gent That does _Things of That Nature_ w^h will
     help me with Expense in Going Abroad (which place I Never mean to
     Return from.) Have fixed for the 10th To Go on w^h Day Shall Take
     leave Of Mr. Tag-rag (who on my Return Shall be glad to See Buried
     or in the Workhouse.) Have wrote This letter Only to Save Y^r
     Respectable Selves trouble w^h Trust You w^d not have Taken.

           "And Remain,
                                 "Gents,
                      "Y^r humble Unworthy servant,
                                                     "T. TITMOUSE.

     "_P. S._--Hope you will Particularly Remember me to Mr. Gamon. What
     is to become of me, know nothing, being so troubled. Am Humbly
     Determined not to employ any Gents in This matter except y^r most
     Respectable House, and sh^d be most Truly Sorry to Go Abroad wh^h
     _am really Often thinking of in Earnest_. Unless something Speedily
     Turns Up, favorable, T. T.--Sh^d like (By the way) to know if you
     sh^d be so Disposed what y^r resp^e house w^d take for my Chances
     Down (_Out and out_) In a Round Sum (_Ready money_). And hope if
     they Write It will be by Next Post or Shall be Gone Abroad."

Old Mr. Quirk, as soon as he had finished the perusal of this skilful
document, started, a little disturbed, from his seat, and bustled into
Mr. Gammon's room with Mr. Titmouse's open letter in his
hand.--"Gammon," said he, "just cast your eye over this, will you?
Really, we must look after Titmouse, or, by Jove! he'll be gone!" Mr.
Gammon took the letter rather eagerly, read deliberately through it, and
then looked up at his fidgety partner, who stood anxiously eying him,
and smiled.

"Well, Gammon, I really think--eh? Don't you"----

"Upon my word, Mr. Quirk, this nearly equals his last letter; and it
also seems to have produced on you the effect desired by its gifted
writer!"

"Well, Gammon, and what of that? Because my heart don't happen to be
_quite_ a piece of flint, you're always"--

"You might have been a far wealthier man than you are but for that soft
heart of yours, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, with a bland smile.(!)

"I know I might, Gammon--I know it. I thank my God I'm not so keen after
business that I can't feel for this poor soul--really, his state's quite
deplorable."

"Then, my dear sir, put your hand into your pocket at once, as I was
suggesting last night, and allow him a weekly sum."

"A--hem! hem! Gammon"--said Quirk, sitting down, thrusting his hands
into his waistcoat pockets, and looking very earnestly at Gammon.

"Well, then," replied that gentleman, shrugging his shoulders, in answer
to the mute appeal--"write and say you _won't_--'tis soon done, and so
the matter ends."

"Why, Gammon, you see, if he goes abroad," said Quirk, after a long
pause--"we lose him forever."

"Pho!--go abroad! He's too much for you, Mr. Quirk--he is indeed, ha,
ha!"

"You're fond of a laugh at my expense, Gammon; it's quite pleasant--you
can't think how I like that laugh of yours!"

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Quirk--but you really misunderstand me; I was
laughing only at the absurd inconsistency of the fellow: he's a most
transparent little fool, and takes _us_ for such. Go abroad! Ridiculous
pretence!--In his precious postscript he undoes all--he says he is only
often _thinking_ of going--- pshaw!--That the wretch is in great
distress, is very probable; but it must go hard with him before he
either commits suicide or goes abroad, I warrant him: I've no fears on
_that_ score--but there _is_ a point in the letter that may be worth
considering--I mean the fellow's hint about borrowing money on his
prospects."

"Yes, to be sure--the very thing that struck _me_." [Gammon faintly
smiled.] "I never thought much about the _other_ part of the letter--all
stuff about going abroad--pho!--But to be sure, if he's trying to raise
money, he may get into keen hands.--Do you really think he _has_ been
trying on anything of the sort?"

"Oh no--of course it's only a little lie of his--or he must have found
out some greater fool than himself, which I had not supposed possible.
But however that may be, I really think, Mr. Quirk, it's high time that
we should take some decided step."

"Well,--yes, it may be," said Quirk, slowly--"and I must say that
Mortmain encouraged me a good deal the day before yesterday."

"Well, and you know what Mr. Frankpledge"----

"Oh, as to Frankpledge--hem!"

"What of Mr. Frankpledge, Mr. Quirk?" inquired Gammon, rather tartly.

"There! there!--Always the way--but what does it signify? Come, come,
Gammon, we know each other too well to quarrel!--I don't mean anything
disrespectful to Mr. Frankpledge, but when Mortmain has been one's
conveyancer these twenty years, and never once--hem!--but, however, he
tells me that we are now standing on sure ground, or that he don't know
what sure ground is, and sees no objection to our even taking
preliminary steps in the matter, which indeed I begin to think it high
time to do!--And as for securing ourselves in respect of any advances to
Titmouse--he suggests our taking a bond, conditioned--say, for the
payment of £500 or £1,000 on demand, under cover of which one might
advance him, you know, just such sums as, and when we pleased; one could
stop when one thought fit; one could begin with three or four pounds
a-week, and increase as his prospects improved--eh!"

"You know _I've_ no objection to such an arrangement; but consider, Mr.
Quirk, we must have patience; it will take a long while to get our
verdict, you know, and perhaps as long to _secure_ it afterwards; and
this horrid little wretch all the while on our hands; what the deuce to
do with him, I really don't know!"

"Humph, humph!" grunted Quirk, looking very earnestly and uneasily at
Gammon.

"And what I chiefly fear is this,--suppose he should get dissatisfied
with the amount of our advances, and, knowing the state and prospects of
the cause, should _then_ turn restive?"

"Ay, confound it, Gammon, all that should be looked to, shouldn't it?"
interrupted Quirk, with an exceedingly chagrined air. "I always like to
look a long way a-head!"

"To be sure," continued Gammon, thoughtfully; "by that time he may have
got substantial friends about him, whom he could persuade to become
security to us for further and past advances."

"Nay, now you name the thing, Gammon; it was what I was thinking of only
the other day:" he dropped his voice--"Isn't there one or two of our own
clients, hem!"----

"Why, certainly, there's old Fang; I don't think it impossible he might
be induced to do a little usury--it's all he lives for, Mr. Quirk; and
the security is good in reality, though perhaps not exactly marketable."

"Nay; but, on second thoughts, why not do it myself, if anything _can_
be made of it?"

"That, however, will be for future consideration. In the mean time, we'd
better send for Titmouse, and manage him a little more--discreetly, eh?
We did not exactly hit it off last time, did we, Mr. Quirk?" said
Gammon, smiling rather sarcastically. "We must keep him at Tag-rag's, if
the thing _can_ be done for the present, at all events."

"To be sure; he couldn't then come buzzing about us, like a gad-fly;
he'd drive us mad in a week, I'm sure."

"Oh, I'd rather give up everything than submit to it. It can't be
difficult for us, I should think, to bind him to our own terms--to put a
bridle in the ass's mouth? Let us say that we insist on his signing an
undertaking to act implicitly according to our directions in
everything."

"Ay, to be sure; on pain of our instantly turning him to the right
about. I fancy it will _do_ now! It was just what I was thinking of!"

"And, now, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, with as much of peremptoriness in
his tone as he could venture upon to Mr. Quirk, "you really must do me
the favor to leave the management of this little wretch to me. You see,
he seems to have taken--Heaven save the mark!--a fancy to me, poor
fool!--and--and--it must be owned we miscarried sadly, the other night,
on a certain grand occasion--eh?"

Quirk shook his head dissentingly.

"Well, then," continued Gammon, "upon one thing I am fixedly determined;
one or the other of us shall undertake Titmouse, solely and singly.
Pray, for Heaven's sake, tackle him yourself--a disagreeable duty! You
know, my dear sir, how invariably I leave everything of real importance
and difficulty to your very superior tact and experience; but _this_
little matter--pshaw!"

"Come, come, Gammon, that's a drop of sweet oil"--

Quirk might well say so, for he felt its softening, smoothing effects
already.

"Upon my word and honor, Mr. Quirk, I'm in earnest. Pshaw!--and you must
know it. I know you too well, my dear sir, to attempt to"----

"Certainly," quoth Quirk, smiling shrewdly, "I must say, those must get
up _very_ early that can find Caleb Quirk napping."--Gammon felt at that
moment that for several years _he_ must have been a very early riser!
And so the matter was arranged in the manner which Gammon had from the
first wished and determined upon, _i. e._ that Mr. Titmouse should be
left entirely to his management; and, after some little discussion as to
the time and manner of the meditated advances, the partners parted. On
entering his own room, Quirk, closing his door, stood for some time
leaning against the side of the window, with his hands in his pockets,
and his eyes instinctively resting on his banker's book, which lay on
the table. He was in a very brown study, the subject on which his
thoughts were busied, being the prudence or imprudence of leaving
Titmouse thus in the hands of Gammon. It might be all very well for
Quirk to _assert_ his self-confidence when in Gammon's presence; but he
did not really feel it. He never left Gammon after any little difference
of opinion, however friendly, without a secret suspicion that somehow or
another Gammon had been too much for him, and always gained his purposes
without giving Quirk any handle of dissatisfaction. In fact, Quirk was
thoroughly afraid of Gammon, and Gammon knew it. In the present
instance, an undefinable but increasing suspicion and discomfort forced
him presently back again into Gammon's room.

"I say, Gammon, you understand, eh?--_Fair play_, you know," he
commenced, with a shy embarrassed air, ill concealed under a forced
smile.

"Pray, Mr. Quirk, what may be your meaning?" inquired Gammon, with
unusual tartness, with an astonished air, and blushing violently, which
was not surprising; for ever since Quirk had quitted him, Gammon's
thoughts had been occupied with only one question, viz. how he should go
to work with Titmouse to satisfy him that he (Gammon) was the only
member of the firm that had a real disinterested regard for him, and so
acquire a valuable control over him! Thus occupied, the observation of
Quirk had completely taken Gammon aback; and he lost his presence of
mind, of course in such case his _temper_ quickly following. "Will you
favor me, Mr. Quirk, with an explanation of your extraordinarily absurd
and offensive observation?" said he, reddening more and more as he
looked at Mr. Quirk.

"You're a queer hand, Gammon," replied Quirk, with almost an equally
surprised and embarrassed air, for he could not resist a sort of
conviction that Gammon had fathomed what had been passing in his mind.

"What did you mean, Mr. Quirk, by your singular observation just now?"
said Gammon, calmly, having recovered his presence of mind.

"Mean? Why, that--we're _both_ queer hands, Gammon, ha, ha, ha!"
answered Quirk, with an anxious laugh.

"I shall leave Titmouse entirely--_entirely_, Mr. Quirk, in your hands;
I will have nothing henceforth whatever to do with him. I am quite sick
of him and his concerns already; I cannot bring myself to undertake such
an affair, and that was what I was thinking of,--when"----

"Eh? indeed! Well, to be sure! Only think!" said Quirk, dropping his
voice, looking to see that the two doors were shut, and resuming the
chair which he had lately quitted, "What do you think has been occurring
to _me_ in my own room, just now? Whether it would suit us better to
throw this monkey overboard, put ourselves confidentially in
communication with the party in possession, and tell him that--hem!--for
a--eh? You understand--eh? a con-si-de-ra-tion--a _suitable_
con-si-de-ra-tion!"

"Mr. Quirk! Heavens!" Gammon was really amazed.

"Well? You needn't open your eyes so very wide, Mr. Gammon--why
shouldn't it be done? You know we wouldn't be satisfied with a trifle,
of course. But suppose he'd agreed to buy our silence with four or five
thousand pounds, really, it's well worth considering! Upon my soul,
Gammon, it _is_ a hard thing on him when one makes the case one's
own!--no fault of his, and it is very hard for him to turn out, and for
such a--eugh!--such a wretch as Titmouse; you'd feel it yourself,
Gammon, if you were in his place, and I'm sure you'd think that four or
five thous"----

"But is not Titmouse our POOR NEIGHBOR?" said Gammon, with a sly smile.

"Why, _that's_ only one way of looking at it, Gammon! Perhaps the man we
are going to eject does a vast deal of good with the property; certainly
he bears a very high name in the county--and fancy Titmouse with ten
thousand a-year!"----

"Mr. Quirk, Mr. Quirk, it's not to be thought of for a moment--not for a
moment," interrupted Gammon, seriously, and even somewhat
peremptorily--"nothing should persuade _me_ to be any party to such"----

At this moment Snap burst into the room with a heated appearance, and a
chagrined air----

"_Pitch_ v. _Grub_----" he commenced breathlessly--

[This was a little pet action of poor Snap's: it was for slander
uttered by the defendant (an hostler) against the plaintiff, (a waterman
on a coach stand,) charging the plaintiff with having _the mange_, on
account of which a woman refused to marry him.]

"Pitch v. Grub--just been tried at Guildhall. Witness bang up to the
mark--words and special damage proved; slapping speech from Sergeant
Shout. Verdict for plaintiff--but only one farthing damages; and Lord
Widdrington said, as the jury had given one farthing for damages, _he_
would give him another for costs,[10] and that would make a halfpenny;
on which the defendant's attorney tendered me--a halfpenny on the spot.
Laughter in court--move for new trial first day of next term, and tip
his lordship a rattler in the next Sunday's _Flash_!"

"Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, sternly, "once for all, if this sort of low
business is to go on, I'll leave the firm, come what will!" [It
flickered across his mind that Titmouse would be a capital client to
start with on his own account.] "I protest our names will quite stink in
the profession."

"Good, Mr. Gammon, good!" interposed Snap, warmly; "your little action
for the usury penalties the other day came off so uncommon well! the
judge's compliment to you was _so_ nice"----

"Let me tell you, Mr. Snap," interrupted Gammon, reddening----

"Pho! Come! Can't be helped--fortune of the war,"--interrupted the head
of the firm,--"there's only one thing to be looked to,--_Is Pitch
solvent?_--of course we've security for costs out of pocket--eh, Snap?"

Now the fact was, that poor Snap had picked up Pitch at one of the
police offices, and, in his zeal for business, had undertaken his case
on pure speculation, relying on the apparent strength of the plaintiff's
case--Pitch being only a waterman attached to a coach stand. When,
therefore, the very ominous question of Mr. Quirk met Snap's ear, he
suddenly happened (at least, he chose to appear to think so) to hear
himself called for from the clerk's room, and bolted out of Mr. Gammon's
room rather unceremoniously.

"Snap will be the ruin of the firm, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, with an air
of disgust. "But I really must get on with the brief I'm drawing; so,
Mr. Quirk, we can talk about Titmouse to-morrow!"

The brief he was drawing up was for a defendant who was going to nonsuit
the plaintiff, (a man with a large family, who had kindly lent the
defendant a considerable sum of money,) solely because of the _want of a
stamp_.

Quirk differed in opinion with Gammon, and, as he resumed his seat at
his desk, he could not help writing the words, "_Quirk and Snap_," and
thinking how well such a firm would sound and work--for Snap was verily
a chip of the old block!

There will probably never be wanting those who will join in abusing and
ridiculing attorneys and solicitors. Why? In almost every action at law,
or suit in equity, or proceeding which may, or may not, lead to one,
each client conceives a natural dislike for his opponent's attorney or
solicitor. _If the plaintiff succeeds_, he hates the defendant's
attorney for putting him (the said plaintiff) to so much expense, and
causing him so much vexation and danger; and, when he comes to settle
with his own attorney, there is not a little heart-burning in looking at
his bill of costs, however reasonable. _If the plaintiff fails_, of
course it is through the ignorance and unskilfulness of his attorney or
solicitor! and he hates almost equally his own, and his opponent's
attorney!--Precisely so is it with a successful or unsuccessful
_defendant_. In fact, an attorney or solicitor is almost always obliged
to be acting _adversely to some one_ of whom he at once makes an enemy;
for an attorney's weapons must necessarily be pointed almost invariably
at our pockets! He is necessarily, also, called into action in cases
when all the worst passions of our nature--our hatred and revenge, and
our self-interest--are set in motion. Consider the mischief which might
be constantly done on a grand scale in society, if the vast majority of
attorneys and solicitors were not honorable, and able men! Conceive
them, for a moment, disposed everywhere to stir up litigation, by
availing themselves of their perfect acquaintance with almost all men's
circumstances--artfully inflaming irritable and vindictive clients,
kindling, instead of stifling, family dissensions, and fomenting public
strife--why, were they to do only a hundredth part of what it is thus in
their power to do, our courts of justice would soon be doubled, together
with the number of our judges, counsel, and attorneys; new jails must be
built to hold the ruined litigants--and the insolvent court enlarged,
and in constant session throughout the year.

But not _all_ of this body of honorable and valuable men are entitled to
this tribute of praise. There are a few QUIRKS, several GAMMONS, and
many SNAPS, in the profession of the law--men whose characters and
doings often make fools visit the sins of individuals upon the whole
species; nay, there are far worse, as I have heard--but I must return to
my narrative.

On Friday night, the 28th July 18--, the state of Mr. Titmouse's affairs
was this; he owed his landlady £1, 9s.; his washerwoman, 6s.; his
tailor, £1, 8s.--in all, three guineas; besides 10s. to Huckaback, (for
Tittlebat's notion was, that on repayment at any time of 10s., Huckaback
would be bound to deliver up to him the document or voucher which he had
given that gentleman,) and a weekly accruing rent of 7s. to his
landlady, besides some very small sums for coffee, (alias chiccory,)
tea, bread, and butter, &c. To meet these serious liabilities, he had
literally--_not one farthing_.

On returning to his lodgings that night, he found a line from
Thumbscrew, his landlady's broker, informing him that, unless by ten
o'clock on the next morning his arrears of rent were paid, he should
distrain, and she would also give him notice to quit at the end of the
week; that nothing could induce her to give him further time. He sat
down in dismay on reading this threatening document; and, in sitting
down, his eye fell on a bit of paper lying on the floor, which must have
been thrust under the door. From the marks on it, it was evident that he
must have trod upon it in entering. It proved to be a summons from the
Court of Requests, for £1, 8s. due to Job Cox, his tailor. He deposited
it mechanically on the table; and for a minute he dared hardly breathe.

This seemed something really like a _crisis_.

After a silent agony of half an hour's duration, he rose trembling from
his chair, blew out his candle, and, in a few minutes' time, might have
been seen standing with a pale and troubled face before the window of
old Balls, the pawnbroker, peering through the suspended
articles--watches, sugar-tongs, rings, brooches, spoons, pins,
bracelets, knives and forks, seals, chains, &c.--to see whether any one
else than old Balls were within. Having at length watched out a very
pale and wretched-looking woman, Titmouse entered to take her place; and
after interchanging a few faltering words with the white-haired and
hard-hearted old pawnbroker, produced his guard-chain, his breast-pin,
and his ring, and obtained three pounds two shillings and sixpence on
the security of them.

With this sum he slunk out of the shop, and calling on Cox, his tailor,
paid his trembling old creditor the full amount of his claim (£1, 8s.)
together with 4s., the expense of the summons--simply asking for a
receipt, without uttering another word, for he felt almost choked. In
the same way he dealt with Mrs. Squallop, his landlady--not uttering one
word in reply to her profuse and voluble apologies, but pressing his
lips between his teeth till the blood came from them, while his little
heart seemed splitting within him. Then he walked up-stairs, with a
desperate air--having just eighteen pence in his pocket--_all his
ornaments gone_--his washerwoman yet unpaid--his rent going on--several
other little matters unsettled; and the 10th of August approaching, when
he expected to be dismissed penniless from Mr. Tag-rag's and thrown on
his own resources for subsistence. When he had regained his room, and
having shut the door, had re-seated himself at his table, he felt for a
moment as if he could have yelled. Starvation and Despair, two fiends,
seemed sitting beside him in shadowy ghastliness, chilling and palsying
him--petrifying his heart within him. WHAT WAS HE TO DO? Why had he been
born? Why was he so much more persecuted and miserable than any one
else? Visions of his ring, his breast-pin, his studs, stuck in a bit of
card, with their price written above them, and hanging exposed to his
view in old Balls' window, almost frenzied him. Thoughts such as these
at length began to suggest others of a dreadful nature.... The means
were at that instant within his reach.... A sharp knock at the door
startled him out of the stupor into which he was sinking. He listened
for a moment as if he were not certain that the sound was a real one.
There seemed a ton-weight upon his heart, which a mighty sigh could lift
for an instant, but not remove; and he was in the act of heaving a
second such sigh, as he languidly opened the door--expecting to
encounter Mr. Thumbscrew, or some of his myrmidons, who might not know
of his recent settlement with his landlady.

"Is this Mr.--Tit--Titmouse's?" inquired a genteel-looking young man.

"Yes," replied Titmouse, sadly.

"Are you Mr. Titmouse?"

"Yes," he replied, more faintly than before.

"Oh--I have brought you, sir, a letter from Mr. Gammon, of the firm of
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, solicitors, Saffron Hill," said the stranger,
unconscious that his words shot a flash of light into a little abyss of
grief and despair before him. "He begged me to give this letter into
your own hands, and said he hoped you'd send him an answer by the first
morning's post."

"Yes--oh--I see--certainly--to be sure--with pleasure--how is Mr.
Gammon?--uncommon kind of him--very humble respects to him--take care to
answer it," stammered Titmouse, in a breath, hardly knowing whether he
were standing on his head or his heels, and not quite certain where he
was.

"Good-evening, sir," replied the stranger, evidently a little surprised
at Titmouse's manner, and withdrew. Titmouse shut his door. With
prodigious trepidation of hand and flutter of spirits, he opened the
letter--an enclosure meeting his eyes in the shape of a bank-note.

"Oh Lord!" he murmured, turning white as the sheet of paper he held.
Then the letter dropped from his hand, and he stood as if stupefied for
some moments; but presently rapture darted through him; a five-pound
bank-note was in his hand, and it had been enclosed in the following
letter:--

                                  "_35, Thavies' Inn, 29th July 18--._

     "MY DEAR MR. TITMOUSE,

     "Your last note addressed to our firm, has given me the greatest
     pain, and I hasten, on my return from the country, to forward you
     the enclosed trifle, out of my own personal resources--and I
     sincerely hope it will be of temporary service to you. May I beg
     the favor of your company on Sunday evening next, at seven o'clock,
     to take a glass of wine with me? I shall be quite alone and
     disengaged, and may have it in my power to make you some important
     communications, concerning matters in which, I assure you, I feel a
     very deep interest on your account. Begging the favor of an early
     answer to-morrow morning, I trust you will believe me, ever, my
     dear sir, your most faithful humble servant,
                                                         "OILY GAMMON.

     "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQ."

The first balmy drop of the long-expected golden shower had at length
fallen upon the panting Titmouse. How polite--nay, how affectionate and
respectful--was the note of Mr. Gammon! and, for the first time in his
life, he saw himself addressed

                       "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQUIRE."

If his room had been large enough to admit of it, he would have skipped
round it again and again in his frantic ecstasy. Having read over
several times the blessed letter of Mr. Gammon, he hastily folded it up,
crumpled up the bank-note in his hand, clapped his hat on his head, blew
out his candle, rushed down-stairs as if a mad dog were at his heels,
and in three or four minutes' time might have been seen standing
breathless before old Balls, whom he had almost electrified by asking,
with an eager and joyous air, for a return of the articles which he had
only an hour before pawned with him; at the same time laying down the
duplicates and the bank-note. The latter, old Balls scrutinized with
most anxious exactness, and even suspicion--but it seemed perfectly
unexceptionable; so he re-delivered to Titmouse his precious ornaments,
and the change out of his note, _minus_ a trifling sum for interest.
Titmouse then started off at top speed to Huckaback; but it suddenly
occurring to him as possible that that gentleman, on hearing of his
good fortune, might look for an immediate repayment of the ten
shillings he had recently lent to Titmouse, he stopped
short--paused--and returned home. There he had hardly been seated a
moment, when down he pelted again, to buy a sheet of paper and a wafer
or two, to write his letter to Mr. Gammon; which having obtained, he
returned at the same speed, almost overturning his fat landlady, who
looked after him as though he were a mad cat scampering up and
down-stairs, and fearing that he had gone suddenly crazy. The note he
wrote to Mr. Gammon was so exceedingly extravagant, that, candid as I
have (I trust) hitherto shown myself in the delineation of Mr.
Titmouse's character, I cannot bring myself to give the aforesaid letter
to the reader--making all allowances for the extraordinary excitement of
its writer.

Sleep, that night and morning, found and left Mr. Titmouse the assured
exulting master of TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. Of this fact, the oftener he
read Mr. Gammon's letter, the stronger became his convictions. 'Twas
undoubtedly rather a large inference from small premises; but it secured
him unspeakable happiness, _for a time_, at a possible cost of future
disappointment and misery, which he did not pause to consider. The fact
is that logic (according to Dr. Watts, but not according to Dr.
Whateley, _the right use of reason_) is not a practical art. No one
regards it in actual life; observe, therefore, folks on all hands
constantly acting like Tittlebat Titmouse in the case before us. His
_conclusion_ was--that he had become the certain master of ten thousand
a-year; his _premises_ were--what the reader has seen. I do not,
however, mean to say, that if the reader be a youth hot from Oxford, he
may not be able to prove, by a very refined and ingenious argument, that
Titmouse was, in what he did above, a fine natural logician; for I
recollect that some great philosopher hath demonstrated, by a famous
argument, that there is NOTHING ANYWHERE: and no one that I have heard
of, hath ever been able to prove the contrary.

By six o'clock the next morning, Titmouse had, with his own hand,
dropped his answer into the letter-box upon the door of Mr. Gammon's
chambers in Thavies' Inn; in which answer he had, with numerous
expressions of profound respect and gratitude, accepted Mr. Gammon's
polite invitation. A very happy man felt Titmouse as he returned to
Oxford Street; entering Messrs. Tag-rag's premises with alacrity, just
as they were being opened, and volunteering his assistance in numerous
things beyond his usual province, with singular briskness and energy; as
if conscious that by doing so he was greatly gratifying Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, whose wishes upon the subject he knew. He displayed
such unwonted cheerfulness and patient good-nature throughout the day,
that one of his companions, a serious youth, in a white neckerchief,
black clothes, and with a blessed countenance--the only professing pious
person in the establishment--took an occasion to ask him, in a
mysterious whisper, "whether he had not got _converted_:" and whether he
would, at six o'clock in the morning, accompany the speaker to a room in
the neighborhood, where he (the youth aforesaid) was going to conduct an
exhortation and prayer meeting! Titmouse refused--but not without a few
qualms; for luck certainly seemed to be smiling on him, and he felt that
he ought to be grateful for it; but then, he at length reflected, the
proper place for that sort of thing would be a regular _church_--to
which he accordingly resolved to go. This change of manners Tag-rag,
however, looked upon as assumed only to affront _him_; seeing nothing
but impertinence and defiance in all that Titmouse did--as if the nearer
Titmouse got to the end of his bondage--_i. e._ the 10th of August--the
lighter-hearted he grew! Titmouse resolved religiously to keep his own
counsel; to avoid even--at all events for the present--communicating
with Huckaback.

On the ensuing Sunday he rose very early, and took nearly twice as long
a time as usual to dress--by reason of his often falling into many
delicious and momentarily intoxicating reveries. By eleven o'clock he
might have been seen entering the gallery of St. Andrew's Church,
Holborn; where he considered that doubtless Mr. Gammon, who lived in the
neighborhood, might have a seat. He asked three or four pew-openers,
both below and above stairs, if they knew which was Mr. Gammon's
pew--Mr. Gammon of Thavies' Inn; not dreaming of presumptuously going to
the pew, but of sitting in some place which commanded a view of it. Mr.
Gammon, I need hardly say, was quite unknown there--no one had ever
heard of such a person; nevertheless Titmouse, (albeit a little galled
at being, in spite of his elegant appearance, slipped into a back seat
in the gallery,) remained to the close of the service--but his thoughts
wandered grievously the whole time. Having quitted the church in a
buoyant humor, he sauntered in the direction of Hyde Park. How soon
might he become, instead of a mere spectator as heretofore, a partaker
in its glories! The dawn of the day of fortune was on his long-benighted
soul; and he could hardly subdue his excited feelings. Having eaten
nothing but a couple of biscuits during the day, as the clock struck
seven he made his punctual appearance at Mr. Gammon's, with a pair of
span-new white kid gloves on; and somewhat flurried, was speedily
ushered, by a comfortable-looking elderly female servant, into Mr.
Gammon's room. Mr. Titmouse was dressed just as he had been when first
presented to the reader, sallying forth into Oxford Street. Mr. Gammon,
who was sitting reading the _Sunday Flash_ at a table on which stood a
couple of decanters, several wine-glasses, and one or two dishes of
fruit, rose and received his distinguished visitor with the most
delightful affability.

"I am most happy, Mr. Titmouse, to see you in this friendly way," said
he, shaking him cordially by the hand.

"Oh, don't name it, sir!" quoth Titmouse, rather indistinctly, and
hastily running his hand through his hair.

"I've nothing, you see, to offer you but a little fruit and a glass of
fair port or sherry. You see I am a very quiet man on Sundays!"

"Particular fond of _them_, sir," replied Titmouse, endeavoring to clear
his throat; for in spite of a strong effort to appear at his ease, he
was unsuccessful; so that, when Gammon's keen eye glanced at the
bedizened figure of his guest, a bitter smile passed over his face,
without having been observed by Titmouse. "_This_," thought he, as his
eye passed from the ring glittering on the little finger of the right
hand, to the studs and breast-pin in the shirt-front, and thence to the
guard-chain glaring entirely outside a damson-colored satin waistcoat,
and the spotless white glove which yet glistened on the left hand--"This
is the writer of the dismal epistle of the other day, announcing his
desperation and destitution!"

"Your health, Mr. Titmouse!--help yourself!" said Mr. Gammon, in a
cheerful and cordial tone; Titmouse pouring out a glass only
three-quarters full, raised it to his lips with a slightly tremulous
hand, and returned Mr. Gammon's salutation. When had Titmouse tasted a
glass of wine before? a reflection occurring not only to himself, but
also to Gammon, to whom it was a circumstance that might be serviceable.

"You see, Mr. Titmouse, mine's only a small bachelor's establishment,
and I cannot put my old servant out of the way by having my friends to
dinner"--[quite forgetting that the day before he had entertained at
least six friends, including Mr. Frankpledge--but, the idea of going
through a dinner _with Mr. Titmouse_!]

And now, O inexperienced Titmouse! unacquainted with the potent
qualities of wine, I warn you to be cautious how you drink many glasses,
for you cannot calculate the effect which they will have upon you; and,
indeed, methinks that with this man you have a game to play which will
not admit of much wine being drunk. Be you, therefore, on your guard;
for wine is like a strong serpent, who will creep unperceivedly into
your empty head, and coil himself up therein, until at length he begins
to move about--and all things are as nought to you!

"Oh, sir, 'pon my honor, beg you won't name it--all one to me,
sir!--Beautiful wine this, sir."

"Pretty fair, I think--certainly rather old;--but what fruit will you
take--raspberries or cherries?"

"Why--a--I've so lately dined," replied Titmouse, alluding to the brace
of biscuits on which he had luxuriated several hours before. He would
have preferred the cherries, but did not feel quite at his ease how to
dispose of the _stones_ nicely--gracefully--so he took a very few
raspberries upon his plate, and ate them slowly, and with a modest and
timid air.

"Well, Mr. Titmouse," commenced Gammon, with an air of concern, "I was
really much distressed by your last letter!"

"Uncommon glad to hear it, sir--knew you would, sir--you're so
kind-hearted;--all quite true, sir!"

"I had no idea that you were reduced to such straits," said Gammon, in a
sympathizing tone, but settling his eye involuntarily on the ring of
Titmouse.

"Quite dreadful, sir--'pon my soul, dreadful; and such usage at Mr.
Tag-rag's!"

"But you mustn't think of going abroad--away from all your friends, Mr.
Titmouse."

"_Abroad_, sir!" interrupted Titmouse, with anxious but subdued
eagerness; "never thought of such a thing!"

"Oh! I--I thought"----

"There isn't a word of truth in it, sir; and if you've heard so, it must
have been from that oudacious fellow that called on you--he's _such_ a
liar--if you knew him as well as I do, sir!" said Titmouse, with a
confident air, quite losing sight of his piteous letter to Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--"No, sir--shall stay, and stick to friends that
stick to me."

"Take another glass of wine, Mr. Titmouse," interrupted Gammon,
cordially, and Titmouse obeyed him; but while he was pouring it out, a
sudden recollection of his letter flashing across his mind, satisfied
him that he stood detected in a flat lie before Mr. Gammon, and he
blushed scarlet.

"Do you like the sherry?" inquired Gammon, perfectly aware of what was
passing through the little mind of his guest, and wishing to divert his
thoughts. Titmouse answered in the affirmative: and proceeded to pour
forth such a number of apologies for his own behavior at Saffron Hill,
and that of Huckaback on the subsequent occasion, as Gammon found it
difficult to stop, over and over again assuring him that all had been
entirely forgiven and even forgotten. When Titmouse came to the
remittance of the five pounds----

"Don't mention it, my dear sir," interrupted Gammon, very blandly; "it
gave me, I assure you, far greater satisfaction to send it, than you to
receive it. I hope it has a little relieved you?"

"I think so, sir! I was, 'pon my life, on my very last legs."

"When things come to the worst, they often mend, Mr. Titmouse! I told
Mr. Quirk (who, to do him justice, came at last into my views) that,
however premature, and perhaps imprudent it might be in us to go so far,
I could not help relieving your present necessities, even out of my own
resources."

[Oh, Gammon, Gammon!]

"How very uncommon kind of you, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse.

"Not in the least, my dear sir--(pray fill another glass, Mr. Titmouse!)
You see Mr. Quirk is quite a man of business--and our profession too
often affords instances of persons whose hearts contract as their purses
expand, Mr. Titmouse--ha! ha! Indeed, those who make their money as hard
as Mr. Quirk, are apt to be slow at parting with it, and _very_
suspicious!"

"Well, I hope no offence, sir; but really I thought as much, directly I
saw that old gent."

"Ah--but _now_ he is embarked, heart and soul, in the affair."

"No! _Is_ he really, sir?" inquired Titmouse, eagerly.

"That is," replied Gammon, quickly, "so long as I am at his elbow,
urging him on--for he wants some one who--hem! In fact, my dear sir,
ever since I had the good fortune to make the discovery, which happily
brought us acquainted with each other, Mr. Titmouse," [it was old Quirk,
as the reader will by and by find, who had made the discovery, and
Gammon had for a long time thrown cold water on it,] "I have been doing
all I could with him, and I trust I may say, have at last got the thing
into shape."

"I'll take my oath, sir," said Titmouse, excitedly, "I never was so much
struck with any one in all my born days as I was with you, sir, when you
first came to my emp--to Mr. Tag-rag's, sir--Lord, sir, how uncommon
sharp you seemed!" Gammon smiled with a deprecating air, and sipped his
wine in silence; but there was great sweetness in the expression of his
countenance. Poor Titmouse's doubts, hopes, and fears, were rapidly
being sublimed into a _reverence_ for Gammon....

"I certainly quite agree with Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, presently, "that
the difficulties in our way are of the most serious description. To
speak, for an instant only, of the risks we ourselves incur
personally--would you believe it, my dear Mr. Titmouse?--in such a
disgraceful state are our laws, that we can't gratify our feelings by
taking up your cause, without rendering ourselves liable to imprisonment
for Heaven knows how long, and a fine that would be ruin itself, if we
should be found out!"

Titmouse continued silent, his wine-glass in his hand arrested in its
way to his mouth; which, together with his eyes, was opened to its
widest extent, as he stared with a kind of terror upon Mr.
Gammon.--"_Are_ we, then, unreasonable, my dear sir, in entreating you
to be cautious--nay, in insisting on your compliance with our wishes, in
all that we shall deem prudent and necessary, when not only your own
best interests, but our characters, liberties, and fortunes are staked
on the issue of this great enterprise? I am sure," continued Gammon,
with great emotion, "you will feel for us, Mr. Titmouse. I see you do!"
Gammon put his hand over his eyes, in order, apparently, to conceal his
emotion, but really to observe what effect he had produced upon
Titmouse. The conjoint influence of Gammon's wine and eloquence not a
little agitated Titmouse, in whose eyes stood tears.

"I'll do anything--anything, sir," Titmouse almost sobbed.

"Oh! all we wish is to be allowed to serve you effectually; and to
enable us to do that"----

"Tell me to get into a soot-bag, and lie hid in a coal-hole, and see if
I won't do it!"

"What! a coal-hole? Would you, then, even stop at Tag-rag and Co.'s?"

"Ye-e-e-e-s, sir--hem! hem! That is, till the _tenth_ of next month,
when my time's up."

"Ah!--ay!--oh, I understand! Another glass, Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon,
pouring himself out some more wine; and observing, while Titmouse
followed his example, that there was an unsteadiness in his motions of a
very different description from that which he had exhibited at the
commencement of the evening--at the same time wondering what the deuce
they should do with him after the _tenth_ of August.

"You see, _I_ have the utmost confidence in you, and had so from the
first happy moment when we met; but Mr. Quirk is rather sus--In short to
prevent misunderstanding (as he says,) Mr. Quirk is anxious that you
should give a _written_ promise." (Titmouse looked eagerly about for
writing materials.) "No, not now, but in a day or two's time. I confess,
my dear Mr. Titmouse, if _I_ might have decided on the matter, I should
have been satisfied with your verbal promise; but I must say, Mr.
Quirk's gray hairs seem to have made him quite--eh! you understand?
Don't you think so, Mr. Titmouse?"

"To be sure! 'pon my honor, Mr. Gammon!" replied Titmouse; not very
distinctly understanding, however, what he was so energetically
assenting to.

"I dare say you wonder why we wish you to stop a few months longer at
your present hiding-place at Tag-rag's?"

"_Can't_, possibly!--after the tenth of next month, sir," replied
Titmouse, eagerly.

"But as soon as we begin to fire off our guns against the enemy--Lord,
my dear sir, if they could only find out, you know, where to get at
you--you would never live to enjoy your ten thousand a-year! They'd
either poison or kidnap you--get you out of the way, unless you keep out
of _their_ way: and if you will but consent to keep snug at Tag-rag's
for a while, who'd suspect where you was? We could easily arrange with
your friend Tag-rag that you should"----

"My stars! I'd give something to hear you tell Tag-rag--why, I wonder
what he'll do!"

"Make you very comfortable, and let you have your own way in
everything--that you may rely upon!"

"Go to the play, for instance, whenever I want, and do all that sort of
thing?"

"Nay, try! anything! And as for money, I've persuaded Mr. Quirk to
consent to our advancing you a certain sum per week, from the present
time, while the cause is going on,"--(Titmouse's heart began to beat
fast,)--"in order to place you above absolute inconvenience; and when
you consider the awful sums we shall have to disburse--cash out of
pocket--(the tongues of counsel, you know, are set on gold springs, and
only gold keys open their lips!)--for court-fees, and a thousand other
indispensable matters, I should candidly say that four thousand pounds
of hard cash out of pocket, advanced by our firm in your case, would be
the very lowest." (Titmouse stared at him with an expression of stupid
wonder.) "Yes--four thousand pounds, Mr. Titmouse, at the very
least--the _very_ least." Again he paused, keenly scrutinizing
Titmouse's features by the light of the candles, which just then were
brought in. "You seem surprised, Mr. Titmouse."

"Why--why--where's all the money to come from, sir?" exclaimed Titmouse,
aghast.

"Ah! that is indeed a fearful question,"--replied Gammon, with a very
serious air; "but at my request, our firm has agreed to make the
necessary advances; and also (for _I_ could not bear the sight of your
distress, Mr. Titmouse!) to supply your necessities liberally in the
mean time, as I was saying."

"Won't you take another glass of wine, Mr. Gammon?" suddenly inquired
Titmouse, with a confident air.

"With all my heart, Mr. Titmouse! I'm delighted that you approve of it.
I paid enough for it, I can warrant you."

"Cuss me if ever I tasted such wine! Uncommon! Come--no heel-taps, Mr.
Gammon--here goes--let's drink--success to the affair!"

"With all my heart, my dear sir--with all my heart. Success to the
thing--amen!" and Gammon drained his glass; so did Titmouse. "Ah! Mr.
Titmouse, you'll soon have wine enough to float a frigate--and indeed
what not--with ten thousand a-year?"

"And all the back-rents, you know--ha, ha!"

"Yes--to be sure!--the back-rents! The sweetest estate that is to be
found in all Yorkshire! Gracious, Mr. Titmouse!" continued Gammon, with
an excited air--"What may you not do? Go where you like--do what you
like--get into Parliament--marry some lovely woman of high rank!"

"Lord, Mr. Gammon!--you a'n't dreaming? Nor I? But now, in course, _you_
must be paid handsome for your trouble!--Only say how much--Name your
sum! What you please! You only get me all you've said--and I'll"----

"For my part, I wish to rely entirely on your mere word of honor.
Between gentlemen, you know--my dear sir"----

"You only try me, sir."

"But you see, Mr. Quirk's getting old, and naturally is anxious to
provide for those whom he will leave behind him--and so Mr. Snap agreed
with him--two to one against me, Mr. Titmouse--of course they carried
the day--two to one."

"Never mind that!--only say the figure, sir!" cried Titmouse, eagerly.

"A single year's income, only--ten thousand pounds will hardly"----

"Ten thousand pounds! By jingo, but that _is_ a slice out of the cake!
Oh, Lord!" quoth Titmouse, looking aghast.

"A mere crumb, my dear sir!--a trifle! Why, _we_ are going to give _you_
that sum at least every year--and indeed it was suggested to our firm,
that unless you gave us at least a sum of twenty-five thousand
pounds--in fact, we were recommended to look out for some other heir."

"Oh dear! oh Mr. Gammon," cried Titmouse, hastily--"it's not to be
thought of, sir."

"So I said; and as for throwing it up--to be sure we shall have
ourselves to borrow large sums to carry on the war--and unless we have
your bond for at least ten thousand pounds, we cannot raise a farthing."

"Well--curse me, if you sha'n't do what you like!--Give me your hand,
and do what you like, Mr. Gammon!"

"Thank you, Mr. Titmouse! How I like a glass of wine with a friend in
this quiet way!--you'll always find me rejoiced to show"----

"Your hand! By George--Didn't I take a liking to you from the first? But
to speak my mind a bit--as for Mr. Quirk--excuse me--but he's a
cur--cur--cur--mudg--mudg--mudg--eon--hem!"

"Hope you've not been so imprudent, my dear Titmouse," threw in Mr.
Gammon, rather anxiously, "as to borrow money--eh?"

"Devil knows, and devil cares! No stamp, I know--bang up to the
mark"--here he winked an eye, and put his finger to his nose--"wide
awake--Huck--uck--uck--uck! how his name sti--sticks. Your hand, Mr.
Gammon--here--this, this way--what are you bobbing your head about for?
Ah, ha!--The floor--'pon my life!--how funny--it's like being at
sea--up, down--oh dear!"--he clapped his hand to his head.

[Pythagoras has finely observed, that a man is not to be considered dead
drunk till he lies on the floor, and stretches out his arms and legs to
prevent his going lower.]

See-saw, see-saw, up and down, up and down, went everything about him.
Now he felt sinking through the floor, then gently rising towards the
ceiling. Mr. Gammon seemed getting into a mist, and waving about the
candles in it. Mr. Titmouse's head swam; his chair seemed to be resting
on the waves of the sea.

"I'm afraid the room's rather close, Mr. Titmouse," hastily observed
Gammon, perceiving from Titmouse's sudden paleness and silence, but too
evident symptoms that his powerful intellect was for a while paralyzed.
Gammon started to the window and opened it. Paler, however, and paler
became Titmouse. Gammon's game was up much sooner than he had calculated
on.

"Mrs. Brown! Mrs. Brown!" he called out, opening the sitting-room
door--"order a coach instantly, and tell Tomkins"--that was the inn
porter--"to get his son ready to go home with this gentleman--he's not
very well." He was quickly obeyed. It was, in truth, "_all up_" with
Titmouse--at least for a while.

As soon as Gammon had thus got rid of his distinguished guest, he
ordered the table to be cleared of the glasses, and tea to be ready
within half an hour. He then walked out to enjoy the cool evening; on
returning, sat pleasantly sipping his tea, now and then dipping into
the edifying columns of the _Sunday Flash_, but oftener ruminating upon
his recent conversation with Titmouse, and speculating upon certain
possible results to himself personally; and a little after eleven
o'clock, that good man, at peace with all the world--calm and
serene--retired to repose. He had that night rather a singular dream; it
was of a snake encircling a monkey, as if in gentle and playful embrace.
Suddenly tightening its folds, a crackling sound was heard; the writhing
coils were then slowly unwound--and, with a shudder, he beheld the
monster licking over the motionless figure, till it was covered with a
viscid slime. Then the serpent began to devour his prey; and, when
gorged and helpless, behold, it was immediately fallen upon by two other
snakes. To his disturbed fancy, there was a dim resemblance between
their heads and those of Quirk and Snap--they all three became
intertwisted together--and writhed and struggled till they fell over the
edge of a dark and frightful precipice--he woke--thank God! it was only
a dream.




CHAPTER V.


When, after his return from Mr. Gammon's chambers, at Thavies' Inn,
Titmouse woke at an early hour in the morning, he was laboring under the
ordinary effects of unaccustomed inebriety. His lips were perfectly
parched; his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth; there was a horrid
weight pressing on his aching eyes, and upon his throbbing head. His
pillow seemed undulating beneath him, and everything swimming around
him; but when, to crown the whole, he was roused from a momentary nap by
the insupportable--the loathed importunities of Mrs. Squallop, that he
would just sit up and partake of three thick rounds of hot buttered
toast, and a great basin of smoking tea, which would do him _so_ much
good, and settle his stomach--at all events, if he'd only have a
thimbleful of gin in it--poor Titmouse was fairly overcome!... He lay in
bed all that day, during which he underwent very severe sufferings; and
it was not till towards night that he began to have anything like a
distinct recollection of the events of the evening which he had spent
with Mr. Gammon; who, by the way, had sent one of the clerks, during the
afternoon, to inquire after him. He did not get out of bed on the
Tuesday till past twelve o'clock, when, in a very rickety condition, he
made his appearance at the shop of Messrs. Tag-rag and Co.; on
approaching which he felt a sudden faintness, arising from mingled
apprehension and disgust.

"What are you doing here, sir?--You're no longer in my employment, sir,"
exclaimed Tag-rag, attempting to speak calmly, as he hurried down the
shop, white with rage, to meet Titmouse, and planted himself right in
the way of his languid and pallid shopman.

"Sir!"--faintly exclaimed Titmouse, with his hat in his hand.

"Very much obliged, sir--very! by the offer of your valuable services,"
said Tag-rag. "But--_that's_ the way out again,
sir--that!--there!--good-morning, sir--good-morning, sir!--that's the
way out"--and he egged on Titmouse, till he had got him fairly into the
street--with infinite difficulty restraining himself from giving the
extruded sinner a parting kick! Titmouse stood for a moment before the
door, trembling and aghast, looking in a bewildered manner at the shop:
but Tag-rag again making his appearance, Titmouse slowly walked away and
returned to his lodgings. Oh that Mr. Gammon had witnessed the
scene--thought he--and so have been satisfied that it had been Tag-rag
who had put an end to his service, not he himself who had quitted it!

The next day, about the same hour, Mr. Gammon made his appearance at the
establishment from which Titmouse had been expelled so summarily, and
inquired for Mr. Tag-rag, who presently presented himself--and
recognizing Mr. Gammon, whose presence naturally suggested the previous
day's transaction with Titmouse, changed color a little.

"What did you please to want, sir?" inquired Mr. Tag-rag, with a
would-be resolute air, twirling round his watch-key with some energy.

"Only a few minutes' conversation, sir, if you please," said Mr. Gammon,
with such a significant manner as a little disturbed Mr. Tag-rag; who,
with an ill-supported sneer, bowed very low, and led the way to his own
little room. Having closed the door, he, with an exceedingly civil air,
begged Mr. Gammon to be seated; and then occupied the chair opposite to
him, and awaited the issue with ill-disguised anxiety.

"I am _very_ sorry, Mr. Tag-rag," commenced Gammon, in his usual elegant
and feeling manner, "that any misunderstanding should have arisen
between you and Mr. Titmouse!"

"You're a lawyer, sir, I suppose?" Mr. Gammon bowed. "Then you must
know, sir, that there are always two sides to a quarrel," said Mr.
Tag-rag, anxiously.

"Yes--you are right, Mr. Tag-rag; and, having already heard Mr.
Titmouse's version, may I be favored with _your_ account of your reasons
for discharging him? For he tells us that yesterday you dismissed him
suddenly from your employment, without giving him any warn"----

"So I did, sir; and what of that?" inquired Tag-rag, tossing his head
with a sudden air of defiance. "Things are come to a pretty pass indeed,
when a man at the head of such an establishment as mine, can't dismiss a
drunken, idle, impertinent--abusive vagabond." Here Mr. Gammon somewhat
significantly took out his tablets--as if to note down the language of
his companion.

"Do you seriously," inquired Mr. Gammon, "charge him with being such a
character, and can you _prove_ your charges, Mr. Tag-rag?"

"Prove 'em! yes, sir, a hundred times over; so will all my young men!"
replied Tag-rag, vehemently.

"And in a court of justice, Mr. Tag-rag?" said Mr. Gammon, emphatically.

"Oh! he is going to _law_, is he? Ah, ha! Bless my soul!--So _that's_
why you're come here--ah, ha!--when you can make a silk purse out of a
sow's ear, you may get your bill out of Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse!--ha, ha,
ha!" laughed Tag-rag, hoping thereby to conceal how much he was really
startled.

"Well--that's _our_ look-out, Mr. Tag-rag: to Mr. Titmouse, his
character is as valuable as Mr. Tag-rag's is to him. In short, Mr.
Titmouse has placed himself in our hands, and we are resolved to go on
with the case, if it cost us a hundred pounds--we are indeed, Mr.
Tag-rag."

"Why--he's not a penny in the world to go to law with!" exclaimed
Tag-rag, with an air of mingled wonder, scorn, and alarm.

"But you forget, Mr. Tag-rag, that if Mr. Titmouse's account of the
business should turn out to be correct, it will be _your_ pocket that
must pay all the expenses, amounting probably to twenty times the sum
which the law may award to him!"

"_Law_, sir?--It's not justice!--I hate law.--Give me common sense and
common honesty!" said Mr. Tag-rag, with a little agitation.

"Both of them would condemn your conduct, Mr. Tag-rag; for I have heard
a full account of what Mr. Titmouse has suffered at your hands--of the
cause of your sudden warning to him, and your still more sudden
dismissal of yesterday. Oh, Mr. Tag-rag! upon my honor, it won't do--not
for a moment--and should you go on, rely upon what I tell you, that it
will cost you dear."

"And suppose, sir," said Tag-rag, in a would-be contemptuous tone--"I
should have witnesses to prove all I've said--which of us will look
funny _then_, sir?"

"Which, indeed! However, since that is your humor, I can only assure you
that it is very possible we may be, by the time of the trial, possessed
of some evidence which will surprise you: and that Mr. Titmouse defies
you to prove any misconduct on his part. We have, in short, taken up his
cause, and, as you may perhaps find by and by, to your cost, we shall
not easily let it drop."

"I mean no offence, sir," said Tag-rag, in a mitigated tone; "but I
must say, that ever since _you_ first came here, Titmouse has been quite
another person. He seems not to know who I am, nor to care either--and
he's perfectly unbearable."

"My dear sir, what has he _said_ or _done_?--that, you know, is what you
must be prepared to prove, when you come into court!"

"Well, sir! and which of us is likely to be best off for
witnesses?--Think of that, sir--I've eighteen young men"----

"We shall chance that, sir," replied Gammon, shrugging his shoulders,
and smiling very bitterly; "but again, I ask, what did you dismiss him
for? and, sir, I request a plain, straightforward answer."

"What did I dismiss him for?--Haven't I eyes and ears?--First and
foremost, he's the most odious-mannered fellow I ever came near--and--he
hadn't a shirt to his back when I first took him--the ungrateful
wretch!--Sir, it's at any rate not against the law, I suppose, to _hate_
a man;--and if it isn't, how I HATE Titmouse!"

"Mr. Tag-rag"--said Gammon, lowering his voice, and looking very
earnestly at his companion--"can I say a word to you in confidence--the
strictest confidence?"

"What's it about, sir?" inquired Tag-rag, somewhat apprehensively.

"I dare say you may have felt, perhaps, rather surprised at the interest
which I--in fact our office, the office of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, in
Saffron Hill--appear to have taken in Mr. Titmouse."

"Why, sir, it's _your_ look-out to see how you're to be paid for what
you're doing--and I dare say lawyers generally keep a pretty sharp
look-out in that direction!"

Gammon smiled, and continued--"It may, perhaps, a little surprise you,
Mr. Tag-rag, to hear that your present (ought I to say, your _late_?)
shopman, Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse, is at this moment probably the very
luckiest man--and one among the richest, too--in this kingdom."

"Why--you don't mean to say he's drawn a prize in the
lottery?"--exclaimed Tag-rag, pricking up his ears, and manifestly
changing color.

"Pho! my dear sir, _that_ is a mere bagatelle compared with the good
fortune which has just fallen to his lot. I solemnly assure you, that I
believe it will very shortly turn out that he is at this moment the
undoubted owner of an estate worth at least ten thousand a-year, besides
a vast accumulation of ready money!"

"Ten thousand a-year, sir!--My Titmouse!--Tittlebat Titmouse!--Ten
thousand a-year! it's quite impossible!" faltered Tag-rag, after a
pause, having gone as pale as death.

"I have as little doubt of the fact, however, sir, as I have that you
yesterday turned him out of doors, Mr. Tag-rag!"

"But"--said Mr. Tag-rag, in a low tone--"who could have dreamed it?--How
was--_really_, Mr. Gammon!--how _was_ I to know it?"

"That's the fact, however," said Gammon, shrugging his shoulders.
Tag-rag wriggled about in his chair, put his hands in and out of his
pockets, scratched his head, and continued staring open-mouthed at the
bearer of such astounding intelligence. "Perhaps, however, all this is
meant as a joke, sir,"--said he--"And if so--it's--it's--a very"----

"It's one of his solicitors who were fortunate enough to make the
discovery, that tells you, sir," interrupted Gammon, calmly. "I repeat
what I have already told you, Mr. Tag-rag, that an estate of ten
thousand a-year is the very least"----

"Why, that's two hundred thousand pounds, sir!"--exclaimed Tag-rag, with
an awe-struck air.

"At the very least"----

"Lord, Mr. Gammon!--Excuse me, sir, but how _did_ you find it out?"

"Mere accident--a mere accidental discovery, sir, in the course of other
professional inquiries!"

"And does Mr. Titmouse know it?"

"Ever since the day, Mr. Tag-rag, after that on which I called on him
here!" replied Gammon, pointedly.

"You--don't--say--so!"--exclaimed Tag-rag, and then continued silent for
nearly half a minute, evidently amazed beyond all power of expression.

"Well,"--at length he observed--"I _will_ say this--with all his few
faults--he's the most amiable young gentleman--the _very amiablest_
young gentleman I--ever--came near. I always thought there was something
uncommon superior-like in his looks."

"Yes--I think he _is_ of rather an amiable turn," observed Gammon, with
an expressive smile--"very gentlemanlike--and so intelligent"----

"Intelligent! Mr. Gammon! you should only have known him as I have known
him!--Well, to be sure!--Lord! His only fault was, that he was above his
business; but when one comes to think of it, how could it be otherwise?
From the time I first clapped eyes on him--I--I--knew he was--a superior
article--quite superior--you know what I mean, sir?--he couldn't help
it, of course!--to be sure--he never was much liked by the other young
men; but that was jealousy!--all jealousy; I saw that all the while."
Here he looked at the door, and added in a very low tone, "Many
sleepless nights has their bad treatment of Mr. Titmouse cost me!--Even
I, now and then, used to look and speak sharply to him--just to keep
him, as it were, down to the mark of the others--he was so uncommon
handsome and genteel in his manner, sir. I remember telling my good lady
the very first day he came to me, that he was a gentleman born--or ought
to have been one."

Now, do you suppose, acute reader, that Mr. Tag-rag was insincere in all
this? By no means. He spoke the real dictates of his heart, unaware of
the sudden change which had taken place in his feelings. It certainly
has an ugly look of improbability--but it was the _nature of the beast_;
his eye suddenly caught a glimpse of the golden calf, and he
instinctively fell down and worshipped it. "Well--at all events," said
Mr. Gammon, scarcely able to keep a serious expression on his
face--"though he's not lived much like a gentleman hitherto, yet he will
live for the future like a _very great gentleman_--and spend his money
like one, too."

"I--I--dare say--- he will!--I wonder how he _will_ get through a
quarter of it!--what do _you_ think he'll do, sir?"

"Heaven only knows--he may very shortly do just what he likes! Go into
the House of Commons, or--perhaps--have a peerage given him"----

"Lord, sir!--I feel as if I shouldn't be quite right again for the rest
of the day!--I own to you, sir, that all yesterday and to-day I've been
on the point of going to Mr. Titmouse's lodgings to apologize
for--for---- Good gracious me! one can't take it all in at once--Ten
thousand a-year!--Many a lord hasn't got more--some not half as much,
I'll be bound!--Dear me, what will he do!--Well, one thing I'm _sure_
of--he'll never have a truer friend than plain Thomas Tag-rag, though
I've not always been a-flattering him--I respected him too much!--The
many little things I've borne with in Titmouse, that in any one else I'd
have--But why didn't he tell me, sir? We should have understood one
another in a moment."--Here he paused abruptly; for his breath seemed
suddenly taken away, as he reviewed the series of indignities which he
had latterly inflicted on Titmouse--the kind of life which that amiable
young gentleman had led in his establishment.

Never had the keen Gammon enjoyed anything more exquisitely than the
scene which I have been describing. To a man of his practical sagacity
in the affairs of life, and knowledge of human nature, nothing could
appear more ludicrously contemptible than the conduct of poor Tag-rag.
How differently are the minds of men constituted! How Gammon despised
Tag-rag! And what opinion has the acute reader by this time formed of
Gammon?

"_Now_, may I take for granted, Mr. Tag-rag, that we understand each
other?" inquired Gammon.

"Yes, sir," replied Tag-rag, meekly. "But do you think Mr. Titmouse will
ever forgive or forget the little misunderstanding we've lately had? If
I could but explain to him how I have been acting a part towards
him--all for his good!"

"You may have opportunities for doing so, if you are really so disposed,
Mr. Tag-rag; for I have something seriously to propose to you.
Circumstances render it desirable that for some little time this
important affair should be kept as quiet as possible; and it is Mr.
Titmouse's wish and ours--as his confidential professional
advisers--that for some few months he should continue in your
establishment, and apparently in your service as before."

"In my service!--my service!" interrupted Tag-rag, opening his eyes to
their utmost. "I sha'n't know how to behave in my own premises! Have a
man with ten thousand a-year behind my counter, sir? I might as well
have the Lord Mayor! Sir, it can't--it can't be. Now, if Mr. Titmouse
chose to become a _partner_ in the house--ay, there might be something
in that--he needn't have any trouble--be only a sleeping partner."
Tag-rag warmed with the thought. "Really, sir, that wouldn't be so much
amiss--would it?" Gammon assured him that it was out of the question;
and gave him some of the reasons for the proposal which he (Mr. Gammon)
had been making. While Gammon fancied that Tag-rag was paying profound
attention to what he was saying, Tag-rag's thoughts had shot far ahead.
He had an only child--a daughter, about twenty years old--Miss Tabitha
Tag-rag; and the delightful possibility of her by-and-by becoming MRS.
TITMOUSE, put her aspiring parent into a perspiration. Into the proposal
just made by Mr. Gammon, Tag-rag fell with great eagerness, which he
attempted to conceal--for what innumerable opportunities would it not
afford him for bringing about the desire of his heart--for throwing the
lovely young couple into each other's way,--endearing them to each
other! Oh, delightful! It really looked almost as if it had been
determined by the powers above that the thing should come to pass! If
Mr. Titmouse did not dine with him, Mrs. and Miss Tag-rag, at Satin
Lodge, Clapham, on the very next Sunday, it should, Tag-rag resolved, be
owing to no fault of _his_.--

Mr. Gammon having arranged everything exactly as he had desired, and
having again enjoined Mr. Tag-rag to absolute secrecy, took his
departure. Mr. Tag-rag, in his excitement, thrust out his hand, and
grasped that of Gammon, which was extended towards him somewhat coldly
and reluctantly. Tag-rag attended him with extreme obsequiousness to the
door; and on his departure, walked back rapidly to his own room, and sat
down for nearly half an hour in a sort of turbid but delicious revery.
Abruptly rising, at length, he clapped his hat on his head, and saying,
as he passed along the shop, that he should soon be back, hurried out
to call upon his future son-in-law, full of affectionate anxiety
concerning his health--and vowing within himself, that henceforth it
should be the study of his life to make his daughter and Titmouse happy!
There could be no doubt of the reality of the event just communicated to
him by Mr. Gammon; for he was one of a well-known firm of solicitors; he
had had an interview on "important business" with Titmouse a fortnight
before, and that _could_ have been nothing but the prodigious event just
communicated to himself. Such things had happened to others--why not to
Tittlebat Titmouse? In short, Tag-rag had no doubt on the matter; and
his heart really yearned towards Titmouse.

Finding that gentleman not at home, Mr. Tag-rag left a most particularly
civil message, half a dozen times repeated, with Mrs. Squallop (to whom
also he was specially civil,) to the effect that he, Mr. Tag-rag, would
be only too happy to see Mr. Titmouse at No. 375, Oxford Street,
whenever it might suit his convenience; that Mr. Tag-rag had something
very particular to say to him about the unpleasant and
_unaccountable_[!] occurrence of yesterday; that Mr. Tag-rag was most
deeply concerned to hear of Mr. Titmouse's indisposition, and anxious to
learn from himself that he had recovered, &c. &c. &c.;--all which,
together with one or two other little matters, which Mrs. Squallop could
not help putting together, satisfied that shrewd lady that "something
was in the wind about Mr. Titmouse;" and made her reflect rather
anxiously on one or two violent scenes she had had with him, and which
_she_ was now ready entirely to forget and forgive. Having thus done all
that at present was in his power to forward the affair, the anxious and
excited Tag-rag returned to his shop; on entering which, one Lutestring,
his principal young man, eagerly apprised him of a claim which he had,
as he imagined, only the moment before, established to the thanks of
Mr. Tag-rag, by having "bundled off, neck and crop, that hodious
Titmouse," who, about five minutes before, had, it seemed, had the
"impudence" to present himself at the shop-door, and walk in as if
nothing had happened!! [Titmouse had so presented himself in consequence
of a call from Mr. Gammon, immediately after his interview with
Tag-rag.]

"You--ordered--Mr. Titmouse--off!!" exclaimed Tag-rag, starting back
aghast, and almost petrifying his voluble and officious assistant.

"Of course, sir," at length exclaimed that person, meekly--"after what
happened yester"----

"Who authorized you, Mr. Lutestring?" inquired Tag-rag, striving to
choke down the rage rising within him.

"Why, sir, I _really_ supposed that"----

"You supposed!! You're a meddling, impertinent, disgusting"---- Suddenly
his face was overspread with smiles, as three or four elegantly dressed
customers entered, whom he received with profuse obeisances. But when
their backs were turned, he directed a lightning look towards
Lutestring, and retreated once more to his room, to meditate on the
agitating events of the last hour. The extraordinary alteration in Mr.
Tag-rag's behavior was attributed by his shopmen to his having been
frightened out of his wits by the threats of Titmouse's lawyer--for such
it was clear the stranger was; and more than one of them stored it up in
their minds as a useful precedent against some future occasion.

Twice afterwards during the day did Tag-rag call at Mr. Titmouse's
lodgings--but in vain; and on returning the third time he felt not a
little disquieted. He determined, however, to call the first thing on
the ensuing morning; if he should then fail of seeing Mr. Titmouse, he
was resolved to go to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--and besides,
address a very affectionate letter to Mr. Titmouse. How totally changed
had become all his feelings towards that gentleman within the last few
hours. The more that Tag-rag reflected on Titmouse's conduct, the more
he saw in it to approve of. How steady and regular had he been in his
habits! how civil and obliging! how patient of rebuke! how pleasing in
his manners to the customers! Surely, surely, thought Tag-rag, Titmouse
can't have been four long years in my employ without getting a--sort of
a--feeling--of attachment to me--he'd have left long ago if he hadn't!
It was true there _had_ now and then been tiffs between them; but who
could agree always? Even Mrs. Tag-rag and he, when they were courting,
often fell out with one another!--Tag-rag was now ready to forget and
forgive all--he had never meant any harm to Titmouse. He believed that
poor Tittlebat was an orphan, unhappy soul! alone in the wide
world--_now_ he would become the prey of designing strangers and
adventurers. Tag-rag did not like the appearance of Gammon. No doubt
that person would try and ingratiate himself as much as possible with
Titmouse! Then Titmouse was remarkably good-looking. "I wonder what
Tabby will think of him when she sees him!" How anxious Tittlebat must
be to see her--_his_ daughter! How could Tag-rag make Tittlebat's stay
at his premises (for he could not bring himself to believe that on the
morrow he could not set all right, and disavow the abominable conduct of
Lutestring) agreeable and delightful? He would discharge the first of
his young men that did not show Titmouse proper respect.--What low
lodgings poor Tittlebat lived in!--Why could he not take up his quarters
at Satin Lodge? They always had a nice spare bedroom. Ah! _that_ would
be a stroke! How Tabby could endear herself to him! What a number of
things Mrs. Tag-rag could do to make him comfortable!

About seven o'clock Tag-rag quitted his premises in Oxford Street, for
his country house; and, occupied with these and similar delightful and
anxious thoughts and speculations, hurried along Oxford Street on his
way to the Clapham stage, without thinking of his umbrella, though it
rained fast. When he had taken his place on the coach-box, beside old
Crack, (as he had done almost every night for years,) he was so
unusually silent that Crack naturally thought his best passenger was
going to become bankrupt, or compound with his creditors, or do
something in that line, shortly. Mr. Tag-rag could hardly keep his
temper at the slow pace old Crack was driving at--just when Mr. Tag-rag
would have wished to gallop the whole way. Never had he descended with
so much briskness, as when the coach at length drew up before the little
green gate, which opened on the tidy little gravel walk, which led up to
the little green wooden porch, which sheltered the little door which
admitted you into little Satin Lodge. As Tag-rag stood for a moment
wiping his wet shoes upon the mat, he could not help observing, for the
first time, by the inward light of ten thousand a-year, how _uncommon_
narrow the passage was; and thinking that Satin Lodge would never _do_,
when he should be the father-in-law of a man worth ten thousand
a-year--but he could easily let that house then, and take a large one.
As he hung his hat upon the peg, the perilous insolence of Lutestring
occurred to him; and he deposited such a prodigious, but half-suppressed
execration upon that gentleman's name, as must have sunk a far more
buoyant sinner many fathoms deeper than usual into a certain hot and
deep place that shall be nameless.

Mrs. and Miss Tag-rag were sitting in the front parlor, intending to
take tea as soon as Mr. Tag-rag should have arrived. It was not a large
room, but sweetly furnished, according to the taste of the owners. There
was only one window, and it had a flaunting white summer curtain. The
walls were ornamented with three pictures, in ponderous gilt frames,
being portraits of Mr., Mrs., and Miss Tag-rag; and I do not feel
disposed to say more concerning these pictures, than that in each of
them the _dress_ was done with elaborate exactness--the _faces_ seeming
to have been painted in, for the purpose of setting off and completing
the picture of the dress. The skinny little Miss Tag-rag sat at the
worn-out, jingling pianoforte, causing it to utter--oh, horrid and
doleful sound!--"_The Battle of Prague_." Mrs. Tag-rag, a fat, showily
dressed woman of about fifty, her cap having a prodigious number of
artificial flowers in it, sat reading a profitable volume, entitled
"_Groans from the Bottomless Pit to Awaken Sleeping Sinners_," by (as he
was pleased to dignify himself) _the Rev._ DISMAL HORROR--a very rousing
young dissenting preacher lately come into that neighborhood, and who
had almost frightened into fits half the women and children, and one or
two old men, of his congregation; giving out, among several similarly
cheering intimations, that they must all necessarily be damned unless
they immediately set about making themselves as miserable as possible in
this world. Only the Sunday before, he had pointed out, with awful force
and distinctness, how cards and novels were the devil's traps to catch
souls; and balls and theatres short and easy cuts to----!

He had proved to his trembling female hearers, in effect, that there was
only one way to heaven, _i. e._ through his chapel; that the only safe
mode of spending their time on earth was reading such blessed works as
that which he had just published, and going daily to prayer-meetings.
When, however, a Sunday or two before, he had the assurance to preach a
funeral sermon, to "improve the death"--such being his impressive
phrase--of a Miss Snooks, (who had kept a circulating library in the
neighborhood, but had not been a member of his congregation;) and who,
having been to the theatre on the Thursday night, was taken ill of a
bowel attack on the Friday, and was a "_lifeless corpse_ when the next
Sabbath dawned"--you might have heard a beetle sneeze within any of the
walls, all over the crowded chapel. Two-thirds of the women present,
struck with the awful judgment upon the deceased Miss Snooks, inwardly
made solemn vows never again to enter the accursed walls of a theatre or
concert-room;[11] many determined no longer to subscribe to the
circulating library, ruining their precious souls with light and amusing
reading; and almost all resolved forthwith to become active members of a
sort of religious tract society, which "dear Mr. Horror" had just
established in the neighborhood, for the purpose of giving the sick and
starving poor _spiritual_ food, in the shape of tracts, (chiefly written
by himself,) which might "wean their affections away from this vain
world," and "fix them on better things," rejoicing, in the meanwhile, in
the bitter pangs of destitution--and able to bear them! All this sort of
thing Mr. Horror possibly imagined to be calculated to advance the cause
of real religion! In short, he had created a sort of spiritual fever
about the place which was then just at its height in worthy Mrs.
Tag-rag.

"Well, Dolly, how are you to-night?" inquired Tag-rag, with unusual
briskness, on entering the room.

"Tolerable, thank you, Tag," replied Mrs. Tag-rag, mournfully, with a
sigh, closing the cheerful volume she had been perusing--it having been
recommended the preceding Sunday from the pulpit by its pious and gifted
author, to be read and prayed over every day by every member of his
congregation!

"And how are _you_, Tabby?" said Tag-rag, addressing his daughter. "Come
and kiss me, you little slut--come!"

"No, I sha'n't, pa! Do let me go on with my practising," said Miss
Tag-rag--and twang! twang! went those infernal keys.

"D' ye hear, Tab? Come and kiss me, you little minx"----

"Really, pa, how provoking--just as I am in the middle of the _Cries of
the Wounded_! I sha'n't--that's flat."

The doting parent could not, however, be denied; so he stepped to the
piano, put his arm around his dutiful daughter's neck, kissed her
fondly, and then stood for a moment behind her, admiring her brilliant
execution of The _Trumpet of Victory_. Having changed his coat, and put
on an old pair of shoes, Mr. Tag-rag was comfortable for the evening.

"Tabby plays wonderful well, Dolly, don't she?" said Tag-rag, as the
tea-things were being brought in, by way of beginning a conversation,
while he drew his chair nearer to his wife.

"Ah! I'd a deal rather see her reading something serious--for life is
short, Tag, and eternity's long."

"Botheration!--Stuff!--Tut!" exclaimed Tag-rag!

"You may find it out one day, my dear, when, alas! it's too late"--

"I'll tell you what, Dolly," said Tag-rag, angrily, "you're doing a
great deal too much in this line of business--my house is getting like a
Methodist meeting-house. I can't bear it--I can't! What the deuce is
come to you all in these parts, lately?" Mr. Tag-rag, I should apprise
the reader, had been induced, some three years before, to quit the
Church of England and take up with Mr. Dismal Horror; but his zeal had
by no means kept pace with that of his wife.

"Ah, Tag-rag," replied his wife, with a sigh, "I can only pray for
you--I can do no more"----

"Oh!" exclaimed Tag-rag, with an air of desperate disgust, thrusting his
hands into his pockets, and stretching his legs to their utmost extent
under the table. "I'll tell you what, Mrs. T." he added after a while,
"I like religion well enough--but too much of it no one can stand. Too
much of one thing is good for nothing; you may choke a dog with
pudding;--I sha'n't renew my sittings at Mr. Horror's."

"Oh, dear, dear pa, do! That's a love of a pa!" interposed Miss Tag-rag,
twirling round on her music-stool. "All Clapham's running after
him--he's quite the rage! There's the Dugginses, the Pips, the Jones,
the Maggots,--and, really, Mr. Horror does preach such dreadful things,
it's quite delightful to look round and see all the people with their
eyes and mouths wide open--and ours is such a good pew for seeing--and
Mr. Horror is such a bee--yeautiful preacher--isn't he, ma?"

"Yes, love, he is--but I wish I could see you profit by him, and
preparing for death"----

"Why, ma, how _can_ you go on in that ridiculous way? You know I'm not
twenty yet, however old you and pa may be!"

"Well, well! poor Tabby!" here Mrs. Tag-rag's voice faltered--"a day
will come, when"----

"Play me the _Devil among the Tailors_, or _Copenhagen Waltz_, or
something of that sort, Tabby," said her father, furiously, "or I shall
be sick!--I can't bear it! Curse Mr. Hor"----

"Well!--Oh, my!!--I never!--Mr. Tag-rag!" exclaimed his astounded wife.

"Play away, Tab, or I'll go and sit in the kitchen! They're cheerful
_there_! The next time I come across Mr. Horror, if I don't give him a
bit of my mind"--here he paused, and slapped his hand with much energy
upon the table. Mrs. Tag-rag wiped her eyes, sighed, and resumed her
book. Miss Tag-rag began to make tea, her papa gradually forgetting his
rage, as he fixed his dull gray eyes fondly on the pert skinny
countenance of his daughter.

"By the way, Tag," exclaimed Mrs. Tag-rag, suddenly, but in the same
mournful tone, addressing her husband, "you haven't of course forgot the
flowers for my new bonnet?"

"Never once thought of it," replied Tag-rag, doggedly.

"You haven't! Good gracious! what am I to go to chapel in next Sunday?"
she exclaimed with sudden alarm, closing her book, "and our seat in the
very front of the gallery!--bless me! I shall have a hundred eyes on
me!"

"Now that you're coming down a bit, and dropped out of the clouds--or
p'r'aps I should say--come up from beneath!--Dolly," said her husband,
much relieved, "I'll tell you a bit of news that will, I fancy,
rather"----

"Come! what is it, Tag?" she inquired with a sort of languid curiosity.

"What should you say of a chance of a certain somebody" (here he looked
unutterable things at his daughter) "that shall be nameless, becoming
mistress of ten thousand a-year?"

"Why"--Mrs. Tag-rag changed color--"has any one fallen in love with
Tab?"

"What should you say, Mrs. T., of our Tab marrying a man with ten
thousand a-year? There's for you! Isn't _that_ better than all your
rel---- hem!"

"Oh, Tag, don't say that; but"--here she hastily turned down the leaf of
_Groans from the Bottomless Pit_, and tossed that inestimable work upon
the sofa--"do tell me, lovey! what _are_ you talking about?"

"What indeed, Dolly!--I'm going to have him here to dinner next
Sunday."

Miss Tag-rag having been listening with breathless eagerness to this
little colloquy between her prudent and amiable parents, unconscious of
what she was about, poured almost all the contents of the tea-pot into
the sugar-basin, instead of her papa's and mamma's tea-cups.

"Have _who_, dear Tag?" inquired Mrs. Tag-rag, impatiently.

"Who? why whom but my Tittlebat Titmouse!! You've seen him, and heard me
speak of him often, you know"----

"What!--_that_ odious, nasty"----

"Hush, hush!" involuntarily exclaimed Tag-rag, with an apprehensive
air--"That's all past and gone--I was always a little too hard on him.
Well, anyhow, he's turned up all of a sudden master of ten thousand
a-year. He has indeed--may this piece of toast choke me if he hasn't!"

Mrs. Tag-rag and her daughter sat in speechless wonder.

"Where did he see Tab, Taggy?" inquired at length Mrs. Tag-rag.

"Oh--I--I--why--you see--I don't exactly think _that_ signifies so
much--he _will_ see her, you know, next Sunday."

"So, then, he's positively coming?" inquired Mrs. Tag-rag, with a
fluttered air.

"Y--e--s--I've no doubt."--(I'll discharge Lutestring to-morrow, thought
Tag-rag, with a sharp inward spasm.)

"But aren't we counting our chickens, Taggy, before they're hatched? If
Titmouse is all of a sudden become such a catch, he'll be snapped up in
a minute, you know, of course"----

"Why, you see, Dolly--we're first in the market, I'm sure of that--his
attorney tells me he's to be kept quite snug and quiet under my care
for months, and see no one"----

"My gracious!" exclaimed Mrs. Tag-rag, holding up both her hands--"if
_that_ don't look like a special interposition of Providence, now"----

"So _I_ thought, Tabby, while Mr. Gammon was telling me!" replied her
husband.

"Ah, Tag, there are many of 'em, if we were only to be on the look-out
for them!" said Mrs. Tag-rag, excitedly.

"I _do_ see it all! It's designed by Providence to get them soon
together! When once Mr. Titmouse gets sight of Tabby, and gets into her
company--eh! Tab, lovey! _you'll_ do the rest, hem!" said Tag-rag,
fondly.

"La, pa! how you _do_ go on!" simpered Miss Tag-rag.

"You must do your part, Tab," said her father--"we'll do ours. He'll
bite, you may depend on it, if you manage well!"

"What sort of a looking young man is he, dear pa?" inquired Miss
Tag-rag, blushing, and her heart fluttering very fast.

"Oh, you _must_ have seen him, sweetest"----

"How should I ever notice any one of the lots of young men at the shop,
pa?--I don't at all know him."

"Well--he's the handsomest, most genteel-looking young fellow I ever
came across; he's long been an ornament to my establishment, for his
good looks and civil and obliging manners--quite a treasure! You should
have seen how he _took_ with the ladies of rank always!"----

"Dear me," interrupted Mrs. Tag-rag, anxiously addressing her daughter,
"I hope, Tabby, that Miss Nix will send home your lilac-colored frock by
next Sunday!"

"If she _don't_, ma, I'll take care she never makes anything more for
_me_, that's poz!" replied Miss Tag-rag, earnestly.

"We'll call there to-morrow, love, and hurry her on," said her mother;
and from that moment until eleven o'clock, when the amiable and
interesting trio retired to rest, nothing was talked of but the charming
Titmouse, and the good fortune he so richly deserved, and how long the
courtship was likely to last. Mrs. Tag-rag, who, for the last month or
so, had always remained on her knees before getting into bed, for at
least ten minutes, on this eventful evening compressed her prayers, I
regret to say, into one minute and a half's time, (as for Tag-rag, a
hardened heathen, for all he had taken to hearing Mr. Horror, he always
tumbled prayerless into bed, the moment he was undressed;) while, for
once in a way, Miss Tag-rag, having taken only five minutes to put her
hair into papers, popped into bed directly she had blown the candle out,
without saying _any_ prayers--or even thinking of finishing the novel
which lay under her pillow, and which she had got on the sly from the
circulating library of the late Miss Snooks. For several hours she lay
in a delicious revery, imagining herself become Mrs. Tittlebat Titmouse,
riding about Clapham in a handsome carriage, going to the play every
night; and what would the three Miss Knippses say when they heard of
it?--they'd burst. And such a handsome man, too!

She sank, at length, into unconsciousness, amid a soft confusion of
glistening white satin--favors--bridesmaids--Mrs. Tittlebat
Tit--Tit--Tit--Tit--mouse.

Titmouse, about half-past nine o'clock on the ensuing morning, was
sitting in his little room in a somewhat troubled humor, musing on many
things, and little imagining the intense interest he had excited in the
feelings of the amiable occupants of Satin Lodge, when a knock at his
door startled him out of his revery. Guess his amazement to see, on
opening it, Mr. Tag-rag!

"Your most obedient, sir," commenced that gentleman, in a subdued and
obsequious manner, plucking off his hat the instant that he saw
Titmouse. "I hope you're better, sir!--Been very uneasy, sir, about
you."

"Please to walk in, sir," replied Titmouse, not a little flustered--"I'm
better, sir, thank you."

"Happy to hear it, sir?--But am also come to offer humble apologies for
the rudeness of that upstart that was so rude to you yesterday, at my
premises--know whom I mean, eh?--Lutestring--I shall get rid of him, I
do think"----

"Thank you, sir---- But--but--when I was in your employ"----

"_Was_ in my employ!" interrupted Tag-rag, with a sigh, gazing earnestly
at him--"It's no use trying to hide it any longer! I've all along seen
you was a world too good for--in fact, quite above your situation in
_my_ poor shop! I _may_ have been wrong, Mr. Titmouse," he continued
diffidently, as he placed himself on what seemed the only chair in the
room, (Titmouse sitting on a common wooden stool)--"but I did it for the
best--eh?--don't you understand me, Mr. Titmouse?" Titmouse continued
looking on the floor incredulously, sheepishly, and somewhat sullenly.

"Very much obliged, sir," at length he answered--"but must say you've
rather a funny way of showing it, sir. Look at the sort of life you've
led me for this"----

"Ah! knew you'd say so! But I can lay my hand on my heart, Mr. Titmouse,
and declare to God--I can, indeed, Mr. Titmouse"---- Titmouse preserved
a very embarrassing silence.--"_See_ I'm out of your good
books--But--won't you forget and forgive, Mr. Titmouse? I _meant_ well.
Nay, I humbly beg forgiveness for everything you've not liked in me. Can
I say more? Come, Mr. Titmouse, you've a noble nature, and I ask
forgiveness!" cried Tag-rag, softly and earnestly: you would have
thought that his life depended on his success in what he was doing!

"You--you ought to do it before the whole shop, if you're in earnest,"
replied Titmouse, a little relenting--"for they've all seen your goings
on."

"Them!--the brutes!--the vulgar fellows, eugh!--you and I, Mr. Titmouse,
are a _leetle_ above such cattle as them! D' ye think we ought to mind
what _servants_ say?--Only you say the word, and I make a clean sweep of
'em all; you shall have the premises to yourself, Mr. Titmouse, within
an hour after any of those chaps shows you the least glimmer of
disrespect."

"Ah! I don't know--you've used me most uncommon bad, 'pon my soul!--far
worse than they have--you've nearly broke my heart, sir! You have!"

"Well, my womankind at home are right, after all! They told me all along
I was going the wrong way to work, when I said how I tried to keep your
pride down, and prevent you from having your head turned by knowing your
good looks! Over and over again, my little girl has said, with tears in
her dear eyes, 'you'll break his spirit, dear papa--if he _is_ handsome,
wasn't it God that made him so?'" The little frostwork which Titmouse
had thrown around his heart, began to melt like snow under sunbeams.
"Ah, Mr. Titmouse, Mr. Titmouse! the women are always right, and _we're_
always wrong," continued Tag-rag, earnestly, perceiving his advantage.
"Upon my soul I could kick myself for my stupidity, and cruelty too!"

"Ah, I should think so! No one knows what I've suffered! And now," added
Titmouse, suddenly, "that I'm--I suppose you've heard it all,
sir?--what's in the wind--and all that?"

"Yes, sir--Mr. Gammon (that most respectable gentleman) and I have had
a long talk yesterday about you, in which he did certainly tell me
everything--nothing like confidence, Mr. Titmouse, when gentleman meets
gentleman, you know! Oh, Lord! the news is really delightful!
delightful!"

"_Isn't_ it, sir?" eagerly interrupted Titmouse, his eyes glistening
with sudden rapture.

"Ah! ten thous--I _must_ shake hands with you, my dear Mr. Titmouse;"
quoth Tag-rag, with affectionate excitement--and, for the first time in
their lives, their hands touched, Tag-rag squeezing that of Titmouse
with energetic cordiality; while he added, with a little emotion in his
tone--"Thomas Tag-rag may be a plain-spoken and wrong-headed man, Mr.
Titmouse--but he's a warm heart, I assure you!"

"And did Mr. Gammon tell you _all_, sir?" eagerly interrupted Titmouse.

"Everything--everything; quite confidential, I assure you, for he saw
the interest I felt in you!"

"And did he say about my--hem!--eh? my stopping a few weeks longer with
you?" inquired Titmouse, chagrin overspreading his features.

"I think he did, indeed, Mr. Titmouse! He's quite bent on it, sir! And
so would any true friend of yours be--because you see!"--here he dropped
his voice, and looked very mysteriously at Titmouse--"in short I quite
agree with Mr. Gammon!"

"Do you indeed, sir?" exclaimed Titmouse, with rather an uneasy look.

"I do, i' faith! Why, they'd give thousands and thousands to get you out
of the way--and what's _money_ to _them_? But they must look very sharp
that get at you in the premises of Thomas Tag-rag, I warrant
'em!--Talking of that, ah, ha!--it _will_ be a funny thing to see you,
Mr. Titmouse--Squire Titmouse--ah, ha, ha!"

"You won't hardly expect me to go out with _goods_, I suppose, sir?"
inquired Titmouse, somewhat anxiously.

"Ha, ha, ha!--Ha, ha, ha!--Might as well ask me if I'd clean that beast
Lutestring's shoes! No, no, my dear Mr. Titmouse, you and I have done
with each other as master and servant; it's only as friends that we know
each other now!--You may say and do whatever you like, and come and go
when and where you like!--It's true it will make my other hands rather
jealous, and get me into trouble; but what do I care? Suppose they _do_
all give me warning for your sake? Let 'em go, say I!" He snapped his
fingers with an air of defiance. "_Your_ looks and manners would keep a
shop full of customers--one Titmouse is worth a hundred of them."

"'Pon my soul, you speak most uncommon gentleman-like, sir, certainly!"
said Titmouse, with a little excitement--"and if you'd only
_always_--but that's all past and gone; and I've no objections to say at
once, that all the articles I may want in your line I'll have at your
establishment, pay cash down, and ask for no discount. And I'll send all
my friends, for, in course, sir, you know I shall have lots of them!"

"Don't forget your oldest, your truest, your humblest friend, Mr.
Titmouse," said Tag-rag, with a cringing air.

"That I won't!" replied Titmouse, heatedly.

[It flashed across his mind that a true and old friend would be only too
happy to do him some such trifling service as to lend him a ten-pound
note.]

"Hem!--Now, _are_ you such a friend, Mr. Tag-rag?" cried he, sheepishly.

"Am I?--Can you doubt me? Try me! See what I would not do for you!
Friend, indeed!" and he looked quite fondly at Titmouse.

"Well, I believe you; sir! And the fact is, a--a--a--you see, Mr.
Tag-rag, though all this heap of money's _coming_ to me, I'm precious
low just _now_"----

"Ye--e--e--s, Mr. Titmouse," quoth Tag-rag, anxiously; his dull gray eye
fixed on that of Titmouse steadfastly.

"Well--if you've a mind to prove your words, Mr. Tag-rag, and don't mind
advancing me a ten-pound note"----

"Hem!" involuntarily uttered Tag-rag, so suddenly and violently, that it
made Titmouse start. Then Tag-rag's face flushed over; he twirled about
his watch-key rapidly, and wriggled about in his chair with visible
agitation.

"Oh, you aren't going to do it! If so, you'd better say it at once,"
quoth Titmouse, rather cavalierly.

"Why--_was_ ever anything so unfortunate?" stammered Tag-rag. "That
cursed lot of French goods I bought only yesterday, to be paid for this
very morning--and it will drain me of every penny!"

"Ah--yes! True! Well, it don't much signify," said Titmouse, carelessly,
running his hand through his bushy hair. "In fact, I needn't have
bothered an old friend at all, now I think of it--Mr. Gammon says he's
my banker to any amount. I beg pardon, I'm sure"----

Tag-rag was in a horrid dilemma. He felt so flustered by the suddenness
and seriousness of the thing, that he could not see his way plain in any
direction.

"Let me see," at length he stammered; and pulling a ready-reckoner out
of his pocket, he affected to be consulting it, as if to ascertain
merely the state of his banker's account, but really desiring a few
moments' time to collect his thoughts. 'Twas in vain, however; nothing
occurred to him; he saw no way of escape; his old friend the devil
deserted him for a moment--supplying him with no ready lie to meet the
exigency. He must, he feared, cash up! "Well," said he--"it certainly
_is_ rather unfortunate, just at this precise moment; but I'll step to
the shop, and see how my ready-money matters stand. It sha'n't be a
trifle, Mr. Titmouse, that shall stand between us. But--if I _should_ be
hard run--perhaps--eh? Would a five-pound note do?"

"Why--a--a--certainly, if it wouldn't suit you to advance the ten"----

"I dare say," interrupted Tag-rag, a trifle relieved, "I shall be able
to accommodate you _so_ far. Perhaps you'll step on to the shop
presently, and then we can talk over matters!--By the way, did you ever
see anything so odd? forgot the main thing! _Do_ come and take your
mutton with me at Clapham next Sunday--my womankind will be quite
delighted. Nay, 'tis _their_ invitation--ha, ha!"

"You're uncommon polite," replied Titmouse, coloring with pleasure. Here
seemed the first pale primrose of the coming spring--an invitation to
Satin Lodge!

"The politeness--the favor--will be yours, Mr. Titmouse! I'm uncommon
proud of your coming! We shall be quite alone! have you all to
ourselves; only me, my wife, and daughter--an only child, Mr.
Titmouse--_such_ a child! She's really often said to me, 'I
wonder'--but,---- I won't make you vain, eh? _Shall_ I call it a
fixture?"

"'Pon my life, Mr. Tag-rag, you're monstrous uncommon polite. It's true,
I was going to dine with Mr. Gammon"----

"Oh! pho! (I mean no disrespect, mind!) he's only a bachelor--_I've_ got
ladies in the case, and all that--eh, Mr. Titmouse? and a _young_ one!"

"Well, thank you, sir. Since you're so pressing"----

"That's it! An engagement, poz!--Satin Lodge--for Sunday next," said
Tag-rag, rising and looking at his watch. "Time for me to be off. See
you soon at the shop? Soon arrange that little matter of business, eh?
You understand? Good-by! good-by!" and shaking Titmouse cordially by the
hand, Tag-rag took his departure. As he hurried on to his shop, he felt
in a most painful perplexity about this loan of five pounds. It was
truly like squeezing five drops of blood out of his heart. But what was
to be done? Could he offend Titmouse? Where was he to stop, if he once
began? Dare he ask for security? Suppose the whole affair should after
all turn into smoke?

Now, consider the folly of Tag-rag. Here was he in all this terrible
pucker about advancing _five pounds_ on the strength of prospects and
chances which he had deemed safe for adventuring _his daughter_
upon--her, the only object on earth, except money, that he regarded with
anything like sincere affection. How was this? The splendor of the
future possible good fortune of his daughter, might, perhaps, have
dazzled and confused his perceptions. Then, again, _that_ was a _remote_
contingent venture; but this sudden appeal to his pocket--the demand of
an immediate outlay and venture--was an instant pressure, and he felt it
severely. Immediate profit was everything to Tag-rag--'twas his very
life's blood! He was, in truth, a _tradesman to his heart's core_. If he
could have seen the immediate _quid pro quo_, or could, at all events,
have got, if only by way of earnest, as it were, a bit of poor
Titmouse's heart, and locked it up in his desk, he would not have cared
so much; it would have been a little in his line;--but here was a
FIVE-POUND NOTE going out forthwith, and nothing immediate, visible,
palpable, replacing it. Oh! Titmouse had unconsciously pulled Tag-rag's
very heart-strings!

Observe, discriminating reader, that there is all the difference in the
world between a TRADESMAN and a MERCHANT; and, moreover, that it is not
every _tradesman_ that is a Tag-rag.

All these considerations combined to keep Tag-rag in a perfect fever of
doubt and anxiety, which several hearty curses (I regret to say) failed
in effectually relieving. By the time, however, that Titmouse had made
his appearance at Mr. Tag-rag's shop, with a sufficiently sheepish air,
and was beginning to run the gantlet of grinning contempt from the
"_gents_" on each side of the shop, Tag-rag had determined on the course
he should pursue in the very embarrassing matter above referred to. To
the inexpressible amazement of all present, he bolted out of a little
counting-house or side-room, hastened to meet Titmouse with outstretched
hand and cordial speech, drew him into his little room, and shut the
door. There Tag-rag informed his flurried young friend that he had made
arrangements (with a little inconvenience, which, however, between
friends, signified nothing) for lending Titmouse five pounds.

"And, as life's uncertain, my dear Mr. Titmouse," said Tag-rag, as
Titmouse, with ill-disguised ecstasy, put the five-pound note into his
pocket--"even between the dearest friends--eh? Understand? It's not
_you_ I fear, nor you me, because we've confidence in each other. But if
anything should happen, those we leave behind us"---- Here he took out
of his desk an "I. O. U. £5," ready drawn up and dated--"a mere slip--a
word or two--is satisfaction to both of us."

"Oh yes, sir! yes, sir!--anything!" said Titmouse; and hastily taking
the pen proffered him, signed his name, on which Tag-rag felt a little
relieved. Lutestring was then summoned into the room, and thus (not a
little to his disgust and astonishment) addressed by his imperious
employer: "Mr. Lutestring, you will have the goodness to see that Mr.
Titmouse, while he may do me the honor to condescend to be here, is
treated by every person in my establishment with the utmost possible
respect. Whoever treats this gentleman with the slightest disrespect
isn't any longer a servant of mine. D' ye hear me, Mr. Lutestring?"
added Tag-rag, sternly, observing a very significant glance of mingled
hatred and wonder which Lutestring directed towards Titmouse. "D' ye
hear me, sir?"

"Oh, yes, sir! yes, sir! your orders shall be attended to," he replied
in as insolent a tone as he could venture upon, leaving the room with a
half audible whistle of contempt, while a grin overspread his features.
Within five minutes he had filled, the mind of every shopman in the
establishment with feelings of mingled wonder, hatred, and fear towards
Titmouse. What, thought they, could have happened? What was Mr. Tag-rag
about? This was all of a piece with his rage at Lutestring the day
before. "Cuss Titmouse! and Tag-rag too!" said or thought every one of
them!

Titmouse, for the remainder of the day, felt, as may be imagined, but
little at his ease; for--to say nothing of his insuperable repugnance to
the discharge of any of his former duties--his uneasiness under the
oppressive civilities of Mr. Tag-rag; and the evident disgust towards
him entertained by his companions; many most important considerations
arising out of recent and coming events--his altering
circumstances--were momentarily forcing themselves upon his attention.
The first of these was his _hair_; for Heaven seemed to have suddenly
given him the long-coveted means of changing its detested hue; and the
next was _an eyeglass_, without which, he had long felt his appearance
and appointments to be painfully incomplete. Early in the afternoon,
therefore, on the readily admitted plea of important business, he
obtained the permission of the obsequious Mr. Tag-rag to depart for the
day; and instantly directed his steps to the well-known shop of a
fashionable perfumer and perruquier, in Bond Street--well-known to
those, at least, who were in the habit of glancing at the enticing
advertisements in the newspapers. Having watched through the window till
the coast was clear, (for he felt a natural delicacy in asking for a
hair-dye before people who could in an instant perceive his urgent
occasion for it,) he entered the shop, where a well-dressed gentleman
was sitting behind the counter reading. He was handsome; and his
elaborately curled hair was of a heavenly black (so at least Titmouse
considered it) which was better than a thousand printed advertisements
of the celebrated fluid which formed the chief commodity there vended.
Titmouse with a little hesitation, asked this gentleman what was the
price of their article "for turning _light_ hair black"--and was
answered--"only seven and sixpence for the smaller-sized bottle." One
was in a twinkling placed upon the counter, where it lay like a
miniature mummy, swathed, as it were, in manifold advertisements.
"You'll find the fullest directions within, and testimonials from the
highest nobility to the wonderful efficacy of the
'CYANOCHAITANTHROPOPOION.'"[12]

"_Sure_ it will do, sir?" inquired Titmouse, anxiously.

"Is _my_ hair dark enough to your taste, sir?" said the gentleman, with
a calm and bland manner--"because I owe it entirely to this invaluable
specific."

"Do you, indeed, sir?" inquired Titmouse: adding with a sigh, "but,
between ourselves, look at mine!"--and, lifting off his hat for a
moment, he exhibited a great crop of bushy, carroty hair.

"Whew! rather ugly that, sir!"--exclaimed the gentleman, looking very
serious--"What a curse it is to be born with such hair, isn't it?"

"'Pon my life I think so, sir!" answered Titmouse, mournfully; "and do
you really say, sir, that this what's-its-name turned _yours_ of that
beautiful black?"

"Think? 'Pon my honor, sir,--certain; no mistake, I assure you! I was
fretting myself into my grave about the color of my hair! Why, sir,
there was a nobleman in here (I don't like to mention names) the other
day, with a head that seemed as if it had been dipped into water, and
then powdered with brick-dust; but--I assure you, the
Cyanochaitanthropopoion was too much for it--it turned black in a very
short time. You should have seen his lordship's ecstasy--[the speaker
saw that Titmouse would swallow anything; so he went on with a confident
air]--and in a month's time he had married a beautiful woman whom he had
loved from a child, but who had vowed she could never bring herself to
marry a man with such a head of hair."

"How long does it take to do all this, sir?" interrupted Titmouse,
eagerly, with a beating heart.

"Sometimes two--sometimes three days. In four days' time, I'll answer
for it, your most intimate friend would not know you. My wife did not
know me for a long while, and wouldn't let me salute her--ha, ha!" Here
another customer entered; and Titmouse, laying down the five-pound note
he had squeezed out of Tag-rag, put the wonder-working bottle into his
pocket, and on receiving his change, departed, bursting with eagerness
to try the effects of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion. Within half an hour's
time he might have been seen driving a hard bargain with a pawnbroker
for a massive-looking eyeglass, upon which, as it hung suspended in the
window, he had for months cast a longing eye; and he eventually
purchased it (his eyesight, I need hardly say, was perfect) for only
fifteen shillings. After taking a hearty dinner in a little dusky
eating-house in Rupert Street, frequented by fashionable-looking
foreigners, with splendid heads of curling hair and mustaches, he
hastened home, eager to commence the grand experiment. Fortunately, he
was undisturbed that evening. Having lit his candle, and locked his
door, with tremulous fingers he opened the papers enveloping the little
bottle; and glancing over their contents, got so inflamed with the
numberless instances of its efficacy, detailed in brief but glowing
terms--as--the "Duke of....--the Countess of....--the Earl of, &c. &c.
&c. &c.--the lovely Miss----, the celebrated Sir Little Bull's-eye, (who
was so gratified that he allowed his name to be used)--all of whom, from
having hair of the reddest possible description, were now possessed of
raven-hued locks"--that he threw down the paper, and hurriedly got the
cork out of the bottle. Having turned up his coat-cuffs, he commenced
the application of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion, rubbing it into his
hair, eyebrows, and whiskers, with all the energy he was capable of, for
upwards of half an hour. Then he read over again every syllable on the
papers in which the bottle had been wrapped; and about eleven o'clock,
having given sundry curious glances at the glass, got into bed, full of
exciting hopes and delightful anxieties concerning the success of the
great experiment he was trying. He could not sleep for several hours. He
dreamed a rapturous dream--that he bowed to a gentleman with coal-black
hair, whom he fancied he had seen before--and suddenly discovered that
he was only looking at _himself_ in a glass!!--This awoke him. Up he
jumped--sprang to his little glass breathlessly--but ah! merciful
Heavens! he almost dropped down dead! His hair was perfectly
_green_--there could be no mistake about it. He stood staring in the
glass in speechless horror, his eyes and mouth distended to their
utmost, for several minutes. Then he threw himself on the bed, and felt
fainting. Out he presently jumped again, in a kind of ecstasy--rubbed
his hair desperately and wildly about--again looked into the
glass--there it was, rougher than before; but eyebrows, whiskers, and
head--all were, if anything, of a more vivid and brilliant green.
Despair came over him. What had all his past troubles been to
this?--what was to become of him? He got into bed again, and burst into
a perspiration. Two or three times he got into and out of bed, to look
at himself--on each occasion deriving only more terrible confirmation
than before, of the disaster which had befallen him. After lying still
for some minutes, he got out of bed, and kneeling down, tried to say his
prayers; but it was in vain--and he rose half choked. It was plain he
must have his head shaved, and wear a wig, which would be making an old
man of him at once. Getting more and more disturbed in his mind, he
dressed himself, half determined on starting off to Bond Street, and
breaking every pane of glass in the shop window of the infernal impostor
who had sold him the liquid which had so frightfully disfigured him. As
he stood thus irresolute, he heard the step of Mrs. Squallop approaching
his door, and recollected that he had ordered her to bring up his
tea-kettle about that time. Having no time to take his clothes off, he
thought the best thing he could do, would be, to pop into bed again,
draw his nightcap down to his ears and eyebrows, pretend to be asleep,
and, turning his back towards the door, have a chance of escaping the
observation of his landlady. No sooner thought of, than done. Into bed
he jumped, and drew the clothes over him--not aware, however, that in
his hurry he had left his legs, with boots and trousers on, exposed to
view--an unusual spectacle to his landlady, who had, in fact, scarcely
ever known him in bed at so late an hour before. He lay as still as a
mouse. Mrs. Squallop, after glancing with surprise at his legs,
happening to direct her eyes towards the window, beheld a small bottle
standing there--only half of whose dark contents were remaining. Oh
gracious!--of course it must be POISON, and Mr. Titmouse must be
dead!--In a sudden fright she dropped the kettle, plucked the clothes
off the trembling Titmouse, and cried out--"Oh, Mr. Titmouse! Mr.
Titmouse! what _have_ you been"----

"Well, ma'am, what the devil do you mean? How dare you"---- commenced
Titmouse, suddenly sitting up, and looking furiously at Mrs. Squallop.
An inconceivably strange and horrid figure he looked. He had all his day
clothes on; a white cotton nightcap was drawn down to his very eyes,
like a man going to be hanged; his face was very pale, and his whiskers
were of a bright green color.

"Lard a-mighty!" exclaimed Mrs. Squallop, faintly, the moment that this
strange apparition had presented itself; and sinking on the chair, she
pointed with a dismayed air to the ominous-looking object standing on
the window shelf. Titmouse thence inferred that she had found out the
true state of the case. "Well--_isn't_ it an infernal shame, Mrs.
Squallop?" said he, getting off the bed; and, plucking off his nightcap,
he exhibited the full extent of his misfortune. "What d'ye think of
_that_!" he exclaimed, staring wildly at her. Mrs. Squallop gave a faint
shriek, turned her head aside, and motioned him away.

"I shall go mad--I SHALL!" cried Titmouse, tearing his green hair.

"Oh Lord!--oh Lord!" groaned Mrs. Squallop, evidently expecting him to
leap upon her. Presently, however, she a little recovered her presence
of mind; and Titmouse, stuttering with fury, explained to her what had
taken place. As he went on, Mrs. Squallop became less and less able to
control herself, and at length burst into a fit of convulsive laughter,
and sat holding her hands to her fat shaking sides, and appearing likely
to tumble off her chair. Titmouse was almost on the point of striking
her! At length, however, the fit went off; and wiping her eyes, she
expressed the greatest commiseration for him, and proposed to go down
and fetch up some soft soap and flannel, and try what "a good hearty
wash would do." Scarce sooner said than done--but, alas, in vain! Scrub,
scrub--lather, lather, did they both; but, the instant that the
soap-suds had been washed off, there was the head as green as ever!

"Oh, murder, murder! what _am_ I to do, Mrs. Squallop?" groaned
Titmouse, having taken another look at himself in the glass.

"Why--really I'd be off to a police-office, and have 'em all taken up,
if as how I was _you!_" quoth Mrs. Squallop.

"No--See if I don't take that bottle, and make the fellow that sold it
me swallow what's left--and I'll smash in his shop front besides!"

"Oh, you won't--you mustn't--not on no account! Stop at home a bit, and
be quiet; it may go off with all this washing, in the course of the day.
Soft soap is an uncommon strong thing for getting colors
out--but--a--a--excuse me now, Mr. Titmouse"--said Mrs. Squallop,
seriously--"why wasn't you satisfied with the hair God Almighty had
given you? D' ye think He didn't know a deal better than you what was
best for you? I'm blest if I don't think this is a judgment on you, when
one comes to consider!"

"What's the use of your standing preaching to me in this way, Mrs.
Squallop?" said Titmouse, first with amazement, and then with fury in
his manner--"A'n't I half mad without it? Judgment or no
judgment--where's the harm of my wanting black hair any more than black
trousers? That a'n't _your own_ hair, Mrs. Squallop--you're as gray as a
badger underneath--'pon my soul! I've often remarked it--I _have_, 'pon
my soul!"

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Himperance!" furiously exclaimed Mrs. Squallop,
"you're a liar! And you deserve what you've got! It _is_ a judgment, and
I hope it will stick by you--so take _that_ for your sauce, you vulgar
fellow!" (snapping her fingers at him.) "Get rid of your green hair if
you can! It's only carrot _tops_ instead of carrot _roots_--and some
likes one, some the other--ha! ha! ha!"

"I'll tell you what, Mrs. Squ"---- he commenced, but she had gone,
having slammed to the door behind her with all her force; and Titmouse
was left alone in a half frantic state, in which he continued for nearly
two hours. Once again he read over the atrocious puffs which had
over-night inflated him to such a degree, and he now saw that they were
all lies. This is a sample of them:

     "This divine fluid (as it was enthusiastically styled to the
     inventor, by the lovely Duchess of Dunderwhistle) possesses the
     inestimable and astonishing quality of changing hair, of whatever
     color, to a dazzling jet-black; at the same time imparting to it a
     rich glossy appearance, which wonderfully contributes to the
     imposing _tout-ensemble_ presented by those who use it. That
     well-known ornament of the circle of fashion, the young and lovely
     Mrs. Fitzfrippery, owned to the proprietor that to this surprising
     fluid it was that she was indebted for those unrivalled raven
     ringlets which attracted the eyes of envying and admiring crowds,"
     and so forth.

A little farther on:--

     "This exquisite effect is not _in all cases_ produced
     instantaneously; much will of course depend (as the celebrated M.
     Dupuytren, of the Hôtel Dieu, at Paris, informed the inventor) on
     the physical idiosyncrasy of the party using it, with reference to
     the constituent particles of the coloring matter constituting the
     fluid in the capillary vessels. Often a single application suffices
     to change the most hopeless-looking head of red hair to as deep a
     black; but, not unfrequently, the hair _passes through intermediate
     shades and tints_--all, however, ultimately settling into a deep
     and permanent black."

This passage not a little revived the drooping spirits of Titmouse.
Accidentally, however, an asterisk at the last word in the above
sentence, directed his eye to a note at the bottom of the page, printed
in such minute type as would have baffled any but the strongest sight
and most determined eye to read, and which said note was the
following:--

     "Though cases _do_, undoubtedly, occasionally occur, in which the
     native inherent indestructible qualities of the hair defy all
     attempts at change or even modification, and resist even _this_
     potent remedy: of which, however, in all his experience" (the
     wonderful specific has been invented for about _six months_) "the
     inventor has known but very few instances."

But to this exceedingly select class of unfortunate incurables, poor
Titmouse, alas! entertained a dismal suspicion that _he_ belonged.

"Look, sir! Look! Only look here what your cussed stuff has done to my
hair!" said Titmouse, on presenting himself soon after to the gentleman
who had sold him the infernal liquid; and, taking off his hat, exposed
his green hair. The gentleman, however, did not appear at all surprised,
or discomposed.

"Ah--yes! I see--I see. You're in the intermediate stage. It differs in
different people"----

"Differs, sir! I'm going mad! I look like a green monkey--Cuss me if I
don't!"

"In _me_, now," replied the gentleman, with a matter-of-fact air, "the
color was a strong _yellow_. But have you read the explanations that are
given in the wrapper?"

"Read 'em?" echoed Titmouse, furiously--"I should think so? Much good
they do _me_! Sir, you're a humbug!--an impostor! I'm a sight to be seen
for the rest of my life! Look at me, sir! Eyebrows, whiskers, and all!"

"_Rather_ a singular appearance, just at present, I must own," said the
gentleman, his face turning suddenly red all over with the violent
effort he was making to prevent an explosion of laughter. He soon,
however, recovered himself, and added coolly--"If you'll only
persevere"----

"Persevere be d----d!" interrupted Titmouse, violently clapping his hat
on his head, "I'll teach you to _persevere_ in taking in the public!
I'll have a warrant out against you in no time!"

"Oh, my dear sir, I'm accustomed to all this!" said the gentleman,
coolly.

"The--devil--you--are!" gasped Titmouse, quite aghast.

"Oh, often--often, while the liquid is performing the first stage of the
change; but, in a day or two afterwards, the parties generally come back
smiling into my shop, with heads as black as crows!"

"No! But really--do they, sir?" interrupted Titmouse, drawing a long
breath.

"Hundreds, I may say thousands, my dear sir! And one lady gave me a
picture of herself, in her black hair, to make up for her abuse of me
when it was in a puce color--Fact, honor!"

"But do you recollect any one's hair turning _green_, and then getting
black?" inquired Titmouse, with trembling anxiety.

"Recollect any? Fifty at least. For instance, there was Lord Albert
Addlehead--but why should I mention names? I know hundreds! But
everything is honor and confidential _here_!"

"And did Lord what's-his-name's hair grow green, and then black; and was
it at first as light as mine?"

"His hair was redder, and in consequence it became greener, and now is
blacker than ever yours will be."

"Well, if I and my landlady have this morning used an ounce, we've used
a quarter of a pound of soft soap in"----

"Soft soap!--soft soap!" cried out the gentleman, with an air of sudden
alarm--"That explains all," (he forgot how well it had been already
explained by him.) "By Heavens, sir!--soft soap! You may have ruined
your hair forever!" Titmouse opened his eyes and mouth with a start of
terror, it not occurring to his astute mind that the intolerable green
had preceded, not followed, the use of the soft soap. "Go home, my dear
sir! God bless you--go home, as you value your hair; take this small
bottle of DAMASCUS CREAM, and rub it in before it's too late; and then
use the remainder of the"----

"Then you don't think it's already too late?" inquired Titmouse,
faintly; and, having been assured to the contrary--having asked the
price of the Damascus cream, which was "_only_ three-and-sixpence,"
(stamp included)--he purchased and paid for it with a rueful air, and
took his departure. He sneaked homeward along the streets with the air
of a pickpocket, fearful that every one he met was an officer who had
his eye on him. He was not, in fact, very far off the mark; for many a
person smiled, and stared, and turned round to look at him as he went
along.




CHAPTER VI.


Titmouse slunk up-stairs to his room in a sad state of depression, and
spent the next hour in rubbing into his hair the Damascus cream. He
rubbed till he could hardly hold his arms up any longer, from sheer
fatigue. Having risen at length to mark, from the glass, the progress he
had made, he found that the only result of his persevering exertions had
been to give a greasy shining appearance to the hair, which remained
green as ever. With a half-uttered groan he sank down upon a chair, and
fell into a sort of abstraction, which was interrupted by a sharp knock
at his door. Titmouse started up, trembled, and stood for a moment or
two irresolute, glancing fearfully at the glass; and then, opening the
door, let in--Mr. Gammon, who started back a pace or two, as if he had
been shot, on catching sight of the strange figure of Titmouse. It was
useless for Gammon to try to check his laughter; so, leaning against the
door-post, he yielded to the impulse, and laughed without intermission
for nearly a couple of minutes. Titmouse felt desperately angry, but
feared to show it; and the timid, rueful, lackadaisical air with which
he regarded the dreaded Mr. Gammon, only prolonged and aggravated the
agonies of that gentleman. When at length he had a little recovered
himself, holding his left hand to his side, with an exhausted air, he
entered the little apartment, and asked Titmouse what in the name of
heaven he had been doing to himself: "_Without this_" (in the absurd
slang of the lawyers) that he suspected most vehemently, all the while,
what Titmouse had been about; but he wished to hear Titmouse's own
account of the matter!--Titmouse, not daring to hesitate,
complied--Gammon listening in an agony of suppressed laughter. He looked
as little at Titmouse as he could, and was growing a trifle more sedate,
when Titmouse, in a truly lamentable tone, inquired, "What's the good,
Mr. Gammon, of ten thousand a-year with such a horrid head of hair as
this?" On hearing which Gammon jumped off his chair, started to the
window, and laughed for one or two minutes without ceasing. This was too
much for Titmouse, who presently cried aloud in a lamentable manner; and
Gammon, suddenly ceasing his laughter, turned round and apologized in
the most earnest manner; after which he uttered an abundance of sympathy
for the sufferings which "he deplored being unable to alleviate." He
even restrained himself when Titmouse again and again asked if he could
not "have the law" of the man who had so imposed on him. Gammon diverted
the thoughts of his suffering client, by taking from his pocket some
very imposing packages of paper, tied round with red tape. From time to
time, however, he almost split his nose with efforts to restrain his
laughter, on catching a fresh glimpse of poor Titmouse's emerald hair.
Mr. Gammon was a man of business, however; and in the midst of all this
distracting excitement, contrived to get Titmouse's signature to sundry
papers of no little consequence; among others, first, to a bond
conditioned for the payment of £500; secondly, another for
£10,000;--both to Caleb Quirk, gentleman; and lastly, an agreement (of
which he gave Titmouse _an alleged_ copy) by which Titmouse, in
consideration of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap using their best
exertions to put him in possession of the estate, &c. &c., bound himself
to conform to their wishes in everything, on pain of their instantly
throwing up the whole affair, looking out for another heir at law (!)
and issuing execution forthwith against Titmouse for all expenses
incurred under his retainer. I said that Gammon gave his confiding
client an _alleged_ copy of this agreement;--it was not a real copy, for
certain stipulations appeared in each, which were not intended to appear
_in_ the other, for reasons which were perfectly satisfactory
to--Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. When Gammon had got to this point,
he thought it the fitting opportunity for producing a second five-pound
note. He did so, and put Titmouse thereby into an ecstasy, which pushed
out of his head for a while all recollection of what had happened to the
outside of it. He had at that moment nearly eleven pounds in hard cash.
Gammon easily obtained from him an account of his little money
transactions with Huckaback--of which, however, all he could tell
was--that for ten shillings down, he had given a written engagement to
pay fifty pounds on getting the estate. Of this Gammon made a careful
memorandum, explaining to Titmouse the atrocious villany of
Huckaback--and, in short, that if he (Titmouse) did not look very
sharply about him, he would be robbed right and left; so that it was of
the utmost consequence to him early to learn how to distinguish between
false and true friends. Gammon went on to assure him that the instrument
which he had given to Huckaback, was probably, in point of law, not
worth a farthing, on the ground of its being both fraudulent and
usurious; and intimated something, which Titmouse did not very
distinctly comprehend, about the efficacy of a bill in equity for a
_discovery_; which--merely to expose villany--at a very insignificant
expense, (not exceeding £100,) would enable the plaintiff in equity to
put the defendant in equity, (_i. e._ Huckaback,) in the way of
declaring, on his solemn oath, that he had advanced the full sum of £50;
and having obtained this important and satisfactory result, Titmouse
would have the opportunity of disproving the statement of
Huckaback--_if he could_: which of course he could not. By this process,
however, a little profitable employment would have been afforded to a
certain distinguished firm in Saffron Hill--and that was _something_--to
Gammon.

"But, by the way, talking of money," said Titmouse, suddenly, "you can't
think how surprising handsome Mr. Tag-rag has behaved to me!"

"Indeed, my dear sir!" exclaimed Gammon, with real curiosity, "what has
he done?"

"Advanced to me five pounds--all of his own head!"

"Are you serious, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Gammon.

Titmouse produced the change which he had obtained for Tag-rag's
five-pound note, minus only the prices of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion,
the Damascus cream, and the eyeglass. Gammon merely stroked his chin in
a thoughtful manner. So occupied, indeed, was he with his reflections,
that though his eye was fixed on the ludicrous figure of Titmouse, which
so shortly before had occasioned him such paroxysms of laughter, he did
not feel the least inclination even to a smile. Tag-rag advance Titmouse
five pounds! A-hem!--Throwing as much smiling indifference into his
manner as was possible, he asked Titmouse the particulars of so strange
a transaction. Titmouse answered (how truly the reader can judge) that
Mr. Tag-rag had, in the very handsomest way, volunteered the loan of
five pounds; and moreover offered him any further sum he might require!

"What a charming change, Mr. Titmouse!" exclaimed Gammon, with a
watchful eye and anxious smile.

"Most delightful, 'pon my soul!"

"Rather sudden, too!--eh?--Mr. Titmouse?"

"Why--no--no; I should say, 'pon my life, certainly not. The fact is,
we've long misunderstood each other. He's had an uncommon good opinion
of me all the while--people _have_ tried to set him against me; but it's
no use, he's found them out--he told me so! And he's not only said, but
_done_ the handsome thing! He's turned up, by Jove, a trump all of a
sudden--though it's long looked an ugly card, to be sure!"

"Ha, ha, ha!--very!--how curious!" exclaimed Mr. Gammon, mechanically;
revolving several important matters in his mind.

"I'm going, too, to dine at Satin Lodge, Mr. Tag-rag's country house,
next Sunday."

"Indeed! It will be quite a change for you, Mr. Titmouse!"

"Yes, it will, by Jove; and--a--a--what's more--there's--hem!--you
understand?"

"Go on, I beg, my dear Mr. Titmouse"----

"There's a lady in the case--not that she's _said_ anything; but a nod's
as good as a wink to a blind horse--eh? Mr. Gammon?"

"I should think so--Miss Tag-rag will have money, of course?"

"You've hit it! Lots! But I've not made up my mind."

[I'd better undeceive this poor devil at once, as to this sordid wretch
Tag-rag, (thought Gammon,) otherwise the cunning old rogue may get a
very mischievous hold upon him! And a _lady in the case_! The old scamp
has a daughter! Whew! this will never do! The sooner I enlighten my
young friend the better--though at a little risk.]

"It's very important to be able to tell who are real and who false
friends, as I was saying just now, my dear Titmouse," said Gammon,
seriously.

"I think so. Now look for instance, there's that fellow Huckaback. I
should say _he_"----

"Pho! pho! my dear sir, a mere beetle--he's not worth thinking of, one
way or the other. But can't you guess another sham friend, who has
changed so suddenly?"

"Do you mean Mr. Tag-rag--eh?"

"I mention no names; but it's rather odd, that when I am speaking of
hollow-hearted friends, _you_ should at once name Mr. Tag-rag--ah, ha,
Mr. Titmouse!"

"The proof of the pudding--handsome is that handsome does; and I've got
£5 of his money, at any rate."

"Of course he took no _security_ for such a trifle, between such _very_
close friends?"

"Oh--why--now you mention it--But 'twas only a line--one line--a mere
_mem._ betwixt two gents--and I noticed it had no stamp!"

"I guessed as much, my dear sir," interrupted Gammon, calmly, with a
significant smile--"Tag-rag and Huckaback are quite on a par--a brace of
worthies--ah, ha, ha! My dear Titmouse, you are too honest and
confiding!"

"What keen eyes you lawyers have to be sure! Well--I never"--said
Titmouse, looking very grave--for he was evidently somewhat staggered.
"I--I--must say," he presently added, looking gratefully at Gammon, "I
think I _do_ now know of a true friend, that sent me two five-pound
notes, and never asked for any security."

"My dear sir, you really pain me by alluding to such a matter!"

[Oh, Gammon, is not this too bad? What are the papers which you know are
now in your pocket, signed only this very evening by Titmouse?]

"You are not a match for Tag-rag, Mr. Titmouse; because he was _made_
for a tradesman--you are not. Do you think he would have parted with his
£5 but for value received? Oh, Tag-rag! Tag-rag!"

"I--I really begin to think, Mr. Gammon--'pon my soul, I do think you're
right."

"Think!--why--for a man of your acuteness--how could he imagine you
could forget the long course of insult and tyranny which you have
endured under him: that he should change all of a sudden--just now,
when"----

"Ay, by Jove! just when I'm coming into my property," interrupted
Titmouse, quickly.

"To be sure--to be sure! just now, I say, to make this sudden change!
Bah! bah!"

"I hate Tag-rag, and always did. Now he's trying to take me in, just as
he does everybody; but I've found him out; I won't lay out a penny with
him!"

"Would you, do you think, ever have seen the inside of Satin Lodge, if
you hadn't"----

"Why, I don't know; I really think--hem!"

"_Would_ you, my dear sir?--But now a scheme occurs to me--a very
amusing idea indeed! Ah, ha, ha!--Shall I tell you a way of proving to
his own face how insincere and interested he is towards you? Go to
dinner by all means, eat his good things, hear all that the whole set of
them have to say, and just before you go, (it will require you to have
your wits about you,) pretend, with a long face, that our affair is all
a bottle of smoke: say that Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap have told
you the day before that they had made a horrid mistake, and you were the
wrong man"----

"'Pon my life, I--I--really," stammered Titmouse "daren't--I couldn't--I
couldn't keep it up--he'd half kill me. Besides, there will be Miss
Tag-rag--it would be the death of her, I know."

"Miss Tag-rag! Gracious Heavens! What on earth can you have to do with
_her_? _You_--why, if you really succeed in getting this fine property,
she might make a very suitable wife for one of your grooms--ah,
ha!--But for _you_--absurd!"

"Ah! I don't know--she may be a devilish fine girl, and the old fellow
will have a tolerable penny to leave her--and a bird in the hand--eh?
Besides, I know what she's all along thought--hem!--but that doesn't
signify."

"Pho! pho! Ridiculous! Ha, ha, ha! Fancy Miss Tag-rag Mrs. Titmouse!
Your eldest son--ah, ha, ha! Tag-rag Titmouse, Esq. Delightful! Your
honored father a draper in Oxford Street!" All this might be very
clever, but it did not seem to _tell_ upon Titmouse, whose little heart
had been reached by a cunning hint of Tag-rag's concerning his
daughter's flattering estimate of Titmouse's personal appearance. The
reason why Gammon attacked so seriously a matter which appeared so
chimerical and preposterous, was this--that according to his present
plan, Titmouse was to remain for some considerable while at Tag-rag's,
and might, with his utter weakness of character, be worked upon by
Tag-rag and his daughter, and get inveigled into an engagement which
might be productive hereafter of no little embarrassment. Gammon
succeeded, however, at length, in obtaining Titmouse's promise to adopt
his suggestion, and thereby discover the true nature of the feelings
entertained towards him at Satin Lodge. He shook Titmouse energetically
by the hand, and left him perfectly certain that if there was one person
in the world worthy of his esteem, and even reverence, that person was
OILY GAMMON, ESQ.

As he bent his steps towards Saffron Hill, he reflected rather anxiously
on several matters which had occurred to him during the interview which
I have just described. On reaching the office, he was presently closeted
with Mr. Quirk, to whom, first and foremost, he exhibited and delivered
the documents to which he had obtained Titmouse's signature, and which,
the reader will allow me to assure him, were of a somewhat different
texture from a certain legal instrument or security which I laid before
him some little time ago.

"Now, Gammon," said the old gentleman, as soon as he had locked up in
his safe the above-mentioned documents--"Now, Gammon, I think we may be
up and at 'em; load our guns, and blaze away," and he rubbed his hands.

"Perhaps so, Mr. Quirk," replied Gammon; "but we must, for no earthly
consideration, be premature in our operations! Let me, by the way, tell
you one or two little matters that have just happened to
Titmouse!"--Then he told Mr. Quirk of the effects which had followed the
use of the potent Cyanochaitanthropopoion, at which old Quirk almost
laughed himself into fits. When, however, Gammon, with a serious air,
mentioned the name of Miss Tag-rag, and his grave suspicions concerning
her, Quirk bounced up out of his chair, almost startling Gammon out of
_his_. If Mr. Quirk had just been told that his banker had broken, he
could scarce have shown more emotion.

The fact was, that he, too, had a DAUGHTER--an only child--Miss
Quirk--whom he had destined to become Mrs. Titmouse.

"A designing old villain!" he exclaimed at length, and Gammon agreed
with him; but strange to say, with all his acuteness, never adverted to
the real cause of Quirk's sudden and vehement exclamation. When Gammon
told him of the manner in which he had opened Titmouse's eyes to the
knavery of Tag-rag, and the expedient he had suggested for its complete
demonstration to Titmouse, Quirk could have worshipped Gammon, and could
not help rising and shaking him very energetically by the hand, much to
his astonishment. After a long consultation, they determined to look
out fresh lodgings for Titmouse, and remove him presently altogether
from the company and influence of Tag-rag. Some time after they had
parted, Mr. Quirk came with an eager air into Mr. Gammon's room, with a
most important suggestion; viz. whether it would not be possible for
them to get Tag-rag to _become a surety_ to them, by and by, on behalf
of Titmouse? Gammon was delighted!--He heartily commended Mr. Quirk's
sagacity, and promised to turn it about in his thoughts very carefully.
Not having been let entirely into Quirk's policy, (of which the reader
has, however, just had a glimpse,) Mr. Gammon did not see the
difficulties which kept Quirk awake almost all that night; viz. how to
protect Titmouse from the machinations of Tag-rag and his daughter, and
yet keep Tag-rag sufficiently interested in, and intimate with,
Titmouse, to entertain, by and by, the idea of becoming surety for him
to them, the said Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and--withal--how to
manage Titmouse all the while, so as to forward their objects, and also
that of turning his attention towards Miss Quirk; all this formed really
rather a difficult problem!--Quirk looked down on Tag-rag with honest
indignation, as a mean and mercenary fellow, whose unprincipled schemes,
thank Heaven! he already saw through, and from which he resolved to
rescue his innocent and confiding client, who was made for better
things--_to wit, Miss Quirk_.

When Titmouse rose the next morning, (Saturday,) behold--he found his
hair had become of a variously shaded purple or violet color!
Astonishment and apprehension by turns possessed him, as he stared into
the glass, at this unlooked-for change of color; and hastily dressing
himself, after swallowing a very slight breakfast, off he went once more
to the scientific establishment in Bond Street, to which he had been
indebted for his recent delightful experiences. The distinguished
inventor and proprietor of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion was behind the
counter as usual--calm and confident as ever.

"Ah! I see--as I said! as I said!" quoth he, with a sort of glee in his
manner. "Isn't it?--coming round quicker than usual--Really, I'm selling
more of the article than I can possibly make."

"Well,"--at length said Titmouse, as soon as he had recovered from the
surprise occasioned by the sudden volubility with which he had been
assailed on entering--"then _is_ it really going on tolerable well?"
taking off his hat, and looking anxiously into a glass that hung close
by.

"_Tolerable_ well, my dear sir! Delightful! Perfect! Couldn't be better!
If you'd studied the thing, you'd know, sir, that purple is the middle
color between green and black. Indeed, black's only purple and green
mixed, which explains the whole thing!" Titmouse listened with infinite
satisfaction to this unanswerable and truly philosophical account of the
matter.

"Remember, sir--my hair is to come like yours--eh? you recollect, sir?
Honor--that was the bargain, you know!"

"I have very little doubt of it, sir--nay, I am certain of it, knowing
it by experience."

[The scamp had been hired expressly for the purpose of lying thus in
support of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion; his own hair being a _natural_
black.]

"I'm going to a grand dinner to-morrow, sir," said Titmouse, "with some
devilish great people at the west end of the town--eh? you understand?
will it do by that time? Would give a trifle to get my hair a shade
darker by that time--for--hem!--most lovely gal--eh? you understand the
thing?--devilish anxious, and all that sort of thing, you know!"

"Yes--I do," replied the gentleman of the shop, in a confidential tone;
and opening one of the glass doors behind him, took out a bottle
considerably larger than the first, and handed it to Titmouse. "This,"
said he, "will complete the thing; it combines chemically with the
purple particles, and the result is--generally arrived at in about two
days' time"----

"But it will do _something_ in a night's time--eh!--surely."

"I should think so! But here it is--it is called the TETARAGMENON
ABRACADABRA."

"What a name!" exclaimed Titmouse, with a kind of awe. "'Pon honor, it
almost takes one's breath away"----

"It will do more, sir; it will take your red hair away! By the way, only
the day before yesterday, a lady of high rank, (between ourselves, Lady
Caroline Carrot,) whose red hair always seemed as if it would have set
her bonnet in a blaze--ha, ha!--came here, after two days' use of the
Cyanochaitanthropopoion, and one day's use of this Tetaragmenon
Abracadabra--and asked me if I knew her. Upon my soul I did not, till
she solemnly assured me she was really Lady Caroline!"

"_How_ much is it?" eagerly inquired Titmouse, thrusting his hand into
his pocket, with no little excitement.

"Only nine-and-sixpence."

"Oh, my stars, what a price! Nine-and-six"----

"Ah, but would you have believed it, sir? This extraordinary fluid cost
a great German chemist his whole life to bring to perfection; and it
contains expensive materials from all the four corners of the world!
It's ruined the proprietor long ago!"

"That may be--but really--I've laid out a large figure with you, sir,
this day or two! Couldn't you say eight sh"----

"We never abate, sir; it's not _our_ style of doing business," replied
the gentleman, in a manner that quite overawed poor Titmouse, who at
once bought this, the third abomination; not a little depressed,
however, at the heavy prices which he had paid for the three bottles,
and the uncertainty he felt as to the ultimate issue. That night he was
so well satisfied with the progress which he was making with his hair,
(for, by candle light, it really looked much darker than could have been
expected,) that he resolved--at all events for the present--to leave
well alone; or at the utmost, to try the effects of the Tetaragmenon
Abracadabra only upon his eyebrows and whiskers. Into them he rubbed the
new specific; which, on the bottle being opened, surprised him in two
respects: first, it was perfectly colorless; secondly, it had a most
infernal smell. It was, however, no use hesitating: he had bought and
paid for it; and the papers in which it was folded gave an account of
its success that was really irresistible and unquestionable. Away,
therefore, he rubbed; and when he had finished, got into bed, in humble
hope as to the result, which would be disclosed by the morning's light.
But, alas! would you have believed it? When he looked at himself in the
glass, about six o'clock on the ensuing morning, (at which hour he
awoke,) I protest it is a fact, that his eyebrows and whiskers were as
white as snow; which, combined with the purple color of the hair on his
head, rendered him one of the most astounding objects (in human shape)
the eye of man had ever beheld. There was the wisdom of age seated in
his white eyebrows and whiskers, unspeakable youthful folly in his
features, and a purple crown of WONDER on his head.

Really, it seemed as if the devil were wreaking his spite on Mr.
Titmouse; nay, perhaps it was the devil himself who had served him with
the bottles in Bond Street. Or was it a mere ordinary servant of the
devil--some greedy, impudent, unprincipled speculator, who, desirous of
acting on the approved maxim--_Fiat experimentum in corpore vili_--had
pitched on Titmouse (seeing the sort of person he was) as a godsend,
quite reckless what effect might be produced on his hair, so as the
stuff were paid for, and its effects noted? It might possibly have been
sport to the gentleman of the shop, but it was near proving death to
poor Titmouse, who might possibly have resolved on throwing himself out
of the window, only that he saw it was not big enough for a baby to get
through. He turned aghast at the monstrous object which his little glass
presented to him; and sank down upon the bed with the feeling that he
was now fit for death. As before, Mrs. Squallop made her appearance with
his kettle for breakfast. He was sitting at the table dressed, and with
his arms folded, with a reckless air, not at all caring to conceal the
new and still more frightful change which he had undergone since she saw
him last. Mrs. Squallop stared at him for a second or two in silence;
then, stepping back out of the room, suddenly drew to the door, and
stood outside, laughing vehemently.

"I'll kick you down-stairs!" shouted Titmouse, rushing to the door pale
with fury, and pulling it open.

"Mr.--Mr.--Titmouse, you'll be the death of me--you will--you will!"
gasped Mrs. Squallop, almost black in the face, and the water running
out of the kettle, which she was unconsciously holding aslant. After a
while, however, they got reconciled. Mrs. Squallop had fancied he had
been but rubbing chalk on his eyebrows and whiskers; and seemed
dismayed, indeed, on hearing the true state of the case. He implored her
to send out for a small bottle of ink; but as it was Sunday morning none
could be got;--she knew that no one in the court used ink, and she
teased him to try a little _blacking_! He did--but it was useless!--He
sat for an hour or two, in an ecstasy of grief and rage. What would he
now have given never to have meddled with the hair which Heaven had
thought fit to send him into the world with? Alas, with what mournful
force Mrs. Squallop's words again and again recurred to him! To say that
he ate breakfast would be scarcely correct. He drank a single cup of
cocoa, and ate a small fragment of roll, and then put away his breakfast
things on the window shelf. If he had been in the humor to go to church,
how could he? He would have been turned out as an object involuntarily
exciting everybody to laughter!

Yet, poor soul, in this extremity of misery, he was not utterly
neglected; for he had that morning quite a little levee. First came Mr.
Snap, who, having quite as keen and clear an eye for his own interest as
his senior partners, had early seen how capable was an acquaintance with
Titmouse of being turned to his (Snap's) great advantage. He had come,
therefore, dressed very stylishly, to do a little bit of toadying on the
sly, (on his own exclusive account;) and had brought with him, for the
edification of Titmouse, a copy of that day's _Sunday Flash_, which
contained a long account of a bloody fight between Birmingham Bigbones
and London Littlego, for £500 a-side, (sixty rounds had been fought,
both men killed, and their seconds had bolted to Boulogne.) Poor Snap,
however, though he had come with the best intentions, and the most
anxious wish to evince profound respect for the future master of ten
thousand a-year, was quite taken by storm by the very first glimpse he
got of Titmouse, and could not for a long while recover himself. He had
come to ask Titmouse to dine with him at a tavern in the Strand, where
there was to be capital singing in the evening; and also to accompany
him, on the ensuing morning, to the Old Bailey, to hear "a most
interesting trial" for bigamy, in which Snap was concerned for the
prisoner--a miscreant, who had been married to five living women!! Snap
conceived (and very justly) that it would give Titmouse a striking idea
of his (Snap's) importance, to see him so much, and apparently so
familiarly concerned with well-known counsel. In his own terse and
quaint way, he was explaining to Titmouse the various remedies he had
against the Bond Street impostor, both by indictment and action on the
case, nay, (getting a little, however, beyond his depth,) he assured the
eager Titmouse, that a bill of discovery would lie in equity, to
ascertain what the Tetaragmenon Abracadabra was composed of, with a view
to his preferring an indictment against its owner, when his learned
display was interrupted by a double knock, and--oh, mercy on us!--enter
Mr. Gammon. Whether he or Snap felt more disconcerted, I cannot say; but
Snap _looked_ the most confused and sneaking. Each told the other a lie,
in as easy, good-natured a way as he could assume, concerning the object
of his visit to Titmouse. Thus they were going on, when--another
knock--and, "Is this Mr. Titmouse's?" inquired a voice, which brought a
little color into the face of both Gammon and Snap; for it was
absolutely old Quirk, who bustled breathless into the room, on his first
visit, and seemed completely confounded by the sight of both his
partners. What with this, and the amazing appearance presented by
Titmouse, Mr. Quirk was so overwhelmed that he scarce spoke a syllable.
Each of the three partners felt (in his own way) exquisite
embarrassment. Huckaback, some time afterwards, made his appearance; but
_him_ Titmouse unceremoniously dismissed in a twinkling, in spite of a
vehement remonstrance. Behold, however, presently another arrival--Mr.
Tag-rag!! who had come to announce that his carriage (_i. e._ a queer,
rickety, little one-horse chaise, with a tallow-faced boy in it, in
faded livery) was waiting to convey Mr. Titmouse to Satin Lodge, and
take him a long drive in the country! Each of these four worthies could
have spit in the other's face: first, for _detecting_, and secondly, for
_rivalling_ him in his schemes upon Titmouse. A few minutes after the
arrival of Tag-rag, Gammon, half-choked with disgust, and despising
himself even more than he despised his fellow-visitors, slunk off,
followed almost immediately by Quirk, who was dying to consult him on
this new aspect of affairs which had presented itself. Snap (who ever
since the arrival of Messrs. Quirk and Gammon had felt like an ape on
hot irons) very shortly followed in the footsteps of his partners,
having made no engagement whatever with Titmouse; and thus the
enterprising and determined Tag-rag was left master of the field. He had
in fact come to _do business_, and business he determined to do. As for
Gammon, during the short time he had stayed, how he had endeared himself
to Titmouse, by explaining, not aware that Titmouse had confessed all to
Snap, the singular change in the color of his hair to have been
occasioned simply by the intense mental anxiety through which he had
lately passed! The touching anecdotes he told of sufferers, whose hair a
single night's agony had changed to all the colors of the rainbow!
Though Tag-rag outstayed all his fellow-visitors, in the manner which
has been described, he could not prevail upon Titmouse to accompany him
in his "carriage," for Titmouse pleaded a pressing engagement, (_i. e._
a desperate attempt he purposed making to obtain some _ink_,) but
pledged himself to make his appearance at Satin Lodge at the appointed
hour (half-past three or four o'clock.) Away, therefore, drove Tag-rag,
delighted that Satin Lodge would so soon contain so resplendent a
visitor--indignant at the cringing, sycophantic attentions of Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, against whom he resolved to put Titmouse on his
guard, and infinitely astonished at the extraordinary change which had
taken place in the color of Titmouse's hair. Partly influenced by the
explanation which Gammon had given of the phenomenon, Tag-rag resigned
himself to feelings of simple wonder. Titmouse was doubtless passing
through stages of physical transmogrification, corresponding with the
marvellous change that was taking place in his circumstances; and for
all he (Tag-rag) knew, other and more extraordinary changes were going
on; Titmouse might be growing at the rate of half an inch a-day, and
soon stand before him a man more than six feet high! Considerations such
as these invested Titmouse with intense and overpowering interest in the
estimation of Tag-rag; _how_ could he make enough of him at Satin Lodge
that day? If ever that hardened sinner felt inclined to utter an inward
prayer, it was as he drove home that day--that Heaven would array his
daughter in angel hues to the eyes of Titmouse!

My friend Tittlebat made his appearance at the gate of Satin Lodge, at
about a quarter to four o'clock. Good gracious, how he had dressed
himself out! So as very considerably to exceed his appearance when first
presented to the reader.

Miss Tag-rag had been before her glass ever since the instant of her
return from chapel, up to within ten minutes' time of Titmouse's
arrival. An hour and a half at least had she bestowed on her hair,
disposing it in little corkscrew and somewhat scanty curls, which quite
glistened in bear's grease, hanging on each side of a pair of lean and
sallow cheeks. The color which ought to have distributed itself over her
cheeks, in roseate delicacy, had, two or three years before, thought fit
to collect itself into the tip of her sharp little nose. Her small gray
eyes beamed with the gentle and attractive expression perceptible in her
father's; and her projecting under lip reminded everybody of that
delicate feature in her mother. She was very short, and her figure
rather skinny and angular. She wore her lilac-colored frock; her waist
being pinched in to a degree which made you think of a fit of the colic
when you looked at her--and gave you a dim vision of a coroner's inquest
on a case of death by tight lacing! A long red sash, tied in a most
elaborate bow, gave a very brilliant air to her dress generally. She had
a thin gold chain round her neck, and wore long white gloves; her left
hand holding her pocket-handkerchief, which she had so suffused with
bergamot that it scented the whole room. Mrs. Tag-rag had made herself
very splendid, in a red silk gown and staring head-dress; in fact, she
seemed _on fire_. As for Mr. Tag-rag, whenever he was dressed in his
Sunday clothes, he looked the model of a dissenting minister; witness
his black coat, waistcoat and trousers, and primly tied white
neckerchief, with no shirt-collar visible. For some quarter of an hour
had this interesting trio been standing at their parlor window, in
anxious expectation of Titmouse's arrival; their only amusement being
the numberless dusty stage-coaches driving every five minutes close past
their gate, (which was about ten yards from their house,) at once
enlivening and ruralizing the scene. Oh, that poor laburnum--laden with
dust, drooping with drought, and evidently in the very last stage of a
decline--that was planted beside the little gate! Tag-rag spoke of
cutting it down; but Mrs. and Miss Tag-rag begged its life a little
longer, because none of their neighbors had one!--and then _that_
subject dropped. How was it that though both the ladies had sat under a
thundering discourse from Mr. Dismal Horror that morning--they had never
once since thought or spoken of him or his sermon--never even opened his
exhilarating "_Groans_"? The reason was plain. They thought of Titmouse,
who was bringing "airs from heaven;" while Horror brought only "blasts
from----!" and _those_ they had every day in the week, (his sermons on
the Sunday, his "_Groans_" on the weekday.) At length Miss Tag-rag's
little heart fluttered violently, for her papa told her that Titmouse
was coming up the road--and so he was. Not dreaming that he could be
seen, he stood beside the gate for a moment, under the melancholy
laburnum; and, taking a dirty-looking silk handkerchief out of his hat,
slapped it vigorously about his boots, (from which circumstance it may
be inferred that he had walked,) and replaced it in his hat. Then he
unbuttoned his surtout, adjusted it nicely, and disposed his chain and
eyeglass just so as to let the tip only of the latter be seen peeping
out of his waistcoat; twitched up his shirt-collar, plucked down his
wristbands, drew the tip of a white pocket handkerchief out of the
pocket in the breast of his surtout, pulled a white glove halfway on his
left hand; and having thus given the finishing touches to his toilet,
opened the gate, and--Tittlebat Titmouse, Esquire, the great guest of
the day, for the first time in his life (swinging a little ebony cane
about with careless grace) entered the domain of Mr. Tag-rag.

The little performance I have been describing, though every bit of it
passing under the eyes of Tag-rag, his wife, and his daughter, had not
excited a smile; their anxious feelings were too deep to be reached or
stirred by light emotions. Miss Tag-rag turned very pale and trembled.

"La, pa!" said she, faintly, "how could you say he'd got white eyebrows
and whiskers? Why--they're a beautiful _black_!"

Tag-rag was speechless: the fact was so--for Titmouse had fortunately
succeeded in obtaining a little bottle of ink, which he had applied with
great effect. As Titmouse approached the house, (Tag-rag hurrying out to
open the door for him,) he saw the two ladies standing at the windows.
Off went his hat, and out dropped the dusty silk handkerchief, not a
little disconcerting him for the moment. Tag-rag, however, soon
occupied his attention at the door with anxious civilities, shaking him
by the hand, hanging up his hat and stick for him, and then introducing
him to the sitting-room. The ladies received him with the most profound
courtesies, which Titmouse returned with a quick embarrassed bow, and an
indistinct--"Hope you're well, mem?"

If they had had presence of mind enough to observe it, the purple color
of Titmouse's hair must have surprised them not a little; all _they_
could see standing before them, however, was--the angelic owner of ten
thousand a-year.

The only person tolerably at his ease, and he _only_ tolerably, was Mr.
Tag-rag; and he asked his guest----

"Wash your hands, Titmouse, before dinner?" But Titmouse said he had
washed them before he had come out. [The day was hot, and he had walked
five miles at a slapping pace.] In a few minutes, however, he felt a
little more assured; it being impossible for him not to perceive the
awful deference with which he was treated.

"Seen the _Sunday Flash_, mem?" he presently inquired, very modestly,
addressing Mrs. Tag-rag.

"I--I--that is--not _to-day_," she replied, coloring.

"Vastly amusing, isn't it?" interposed Tag-rag, to prevent mischief--for
he knew his wife would as soon have taken a cockatrice into her hand.

"Ye--e--s," replied Titmouse, who had not even glanced at the copy which
Snap had brought him. "An uncommon good fight between Birmingham
Big"----

Tag-rag saw his wife getting redder and redder. "No news stirring about
things in general, is there?" said he, with a desperate attempt at a
diversion.

"Not that I have heard," replied Titmouse. Soon he got a little farther,
and said how cheerful the stages going past must make the house. Tag-rag
agreed with him. Then there was a little pause. None of the party knew
exactly which way to look, nor in what posture to sit. Faint "hems" were
occasionally heard. In short, no one felt _at home_.

"Been to church, mem, this morning, mem?" timidly inquired Titmouse of
Miss Tag-rag--the first time of his daring to address her.

"Yes, sir," she replied, faintly coloring, casting her eyes to the
ground, and suddenly putting her hand into that of her mother--with
_such_ an innocent, engaging simplicity--like a timid fawn lying as
close as possible to its dam![13]

"We always go to _chapel_, sir," said Mrs. Tag-rag, confidently, in
spite of a deadly look from her husband; "the _gospel_ a'n't preached in
the Church of England! We sit under Mr. Horror--a heavenly preacher!
You've heard of Mr. Horror?"

"Yes, mem! Oh, yes! Capital preacher!" replied Titmouse, who of course
(being a true churchman) had never in his life heard of Mr. Horror, or
any other dissenter.

"When _will_ dinner be ready, Mrs. T.?" inquired Tag-rag, abruptly, and
with a very perceptible dash of sternness in his tone; but dinner was
announced the very next moment. He took his wife's arm, and in doing so,
gave it a sudden vehement pressure, which, coupled with a furious
glance, explained to her the extent to which she had incurred his anger!

Titmouse's offered arm the timid Miss Tag-rag scarcely touched with the
tip of her finger, as she walked beside him to dinner. He soon got
tolerably composed and cheerful at dinner, (which, contrary to their
usual custom--which was to have a cheerless _cold_ dinner on the
Sabbath--consisted of a little piece of nice roast beef, with plenty of
horse-radish, Yorkshire pudding, a boiled fowl, a plum-pudding made by
Mrs. Tag-rag, and custards which had been superintended by Miss Tag-rag
herself,) and, to oblige his hospitable host and hostess, ate till he
was near bursting. Miss Tag-rag, though really very hungry, could be
prevailed upon to take only a very small slice of beef and a quarter of
a custard, and drank a third of a glass of quasi sherry (_i. e._ Cape
wine) after dinner. She never once spoke, except in hurried answers, to
her papa and mamma; and sitting exactly opposite Titmouse, (with a big
plate of greens and a boiled fowl between them,) was continually
coloring whenever their eyes happened to encounter one another, on which
occasions, hers would suddenly drop, as if overpowered by the brilliance
of his. Titmouse began to love her very fast. After the ladies had
withdrawn, you should have heard the way in which Tag-rag went on with
Titmouse!--I can liken the two to nothing but an old fat spider and a
little fly.

    "Will you come into my parlor?
    Said the spider to the fly;"

--in the old song: and it might have been well for Titmouse to have
answered, in the language of the aforesaid fly:--

    "No, thank you, sir, I really feel
    No curiosity."

Titmouse, however, swallowed with equal facility Mr. Tag-rag's hard port
and his soft blarney; but _all_ fools have large swallows. When, at
length, Tag-rag with exquisite skill and delicacy alluded to the
painfully evident embarrassment of his "poor Tabby," and said he had
"all of a sudden found out what had been so long the matter with her,"
[ay, even this went down,] and hemmed, and winked his eye, and drained
his glass, Titmouse began to get flustered, blushed, and hoped Mr.
Tag-rag would soon "join the ladies." They did so, Tag-rag stopping
behind for a few moments to lock up the wine and the remains of the
fruit, not wishing to subject the servant-boy to temptation by the rare
opportunity afforded by fruit left on the table. Miss Tag-rag presided
over the tea-things. There were muffins, and crumpets, and reeking-hot
buttered toast; and hospitable Mrs. Tag-rag would hear of no denial,
"things had been _got_, and must be _eat_," she thought within herself;
so poor Titmouse, after a most desperate resistance, was obliged to
swallow a round of toast, half a muffin, an entire crumpet, and four
cups of hot tea; after which _they_ felt that _he_ must feel
comfortable; but he, alas, in fact, experienced a very painful degree of
turgidity, and a miserable conviction that he should be able neither to
eat nor drink anything more for the remainder of the week!

After the tea-things had been removed, Tag-rag, directing Titmouse's
attention to the piano, which was open, (with some music on it, ready to
be played from,) asked him whether he liked music. Titmouse, with great
eagerness, hoped Miss T. would give them some music; and she, after
holding out a long and vigorous siege, at length asked her papa what it
should be.

"_The Battle of Prague_," said her papa.

"_Before Jehovah's awful throne_, my dear!" hastily and anxiously
interposed her mamma.

"The Battle," sternly repeated her papa.

"It's Sunday night, Mr. T.," meekly rejoined his wife.

"Which will you have, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Tag-rag, with _The Battle
of Prague_ written in every feature of his face. Titmouse almost burst
into a state of perspiration.

"A little of both, sir, if you please."

"Well," replied Tag-rag, slightly relaxing, "that will do. Split the
difference--eh? Come, Tab, down with you. Titmouse, will you turn over
the music for my little girl?"

Titmouse rose, and having sheepishly taken his station beside Miss
Tag-rag, the performances commenced with _Before Jehovah's awful
throne_! But mercy upon us! at what a rate she rattled over that "pious
air!" If its respectable composer (whoever he may be) had been present,
he must have gone into a fit; but there was no help for it--the heart of
the lovely performer was in _The Battle of Prague_, to which she
presently did most ample justice. So much were her feelings engaged in
that sublime composition, that the bursting of one of the
strings--twang! in the middle of the "_cannonading_" did not at all
disturb her; and, as soon as she had finished the exquisite "finale,"
Titmouse was in such a tumult of excitement, from a variety of causes,
that he could have shed tears. Though he had never once turned over at
the right place, Miss Tag-rag thanked him for his services with a smile
of infinite sweetness. Titmouse vowed he had never heard such splendid
music--begged for more: and away went Miss Tag-rag, hurried away by her
excitement. Rondo after rondo, march after march, she rattled over for
at least half an hour upon those hideous jingling keys; at the end of
which old Tag-rag suddenly kissed her with passionate fondness. Though
Mrs. Tag-rag was horrified at the impiety of all this, she kept a very
anxious eye on the young couple, and interchanged with her husband,
every now and then, very significant looks. Shortly after nine, spirits,
wine, and hot and cold water, were brought in. At the sight of them
Titmouse looked alarmed--for he knew that he must take something more,
though he would have freely given five shillings to be excused--for he
felt as if he could not hold another drop! But it was in vain.
_Willy-nilly_, a glass of gin and water stood soon before him; he
protested he could not touch it unless Miss Tag-rag would "take
something"--whereupon, with a blush, she "thought she _would_" take a
wine-glassful of sherry and water. This was provided her. Then Tag-rag
mixed a tumbler of port-wine negus for Mrs. Tag-rag, and a great glass
of mahogany-colored brandy and water for himself; and then he looked
round the elegant little apartment, and felt perfectly happy. As
Titmouse advanced with his gin and water, his spirits got higher and
higher, and his tongue more fluent. He once or twice dropped the "Mr."
when addressing Tag-rag; several times smiled, and once even winked at
the embarrassed Miss Tag-rag. Mr. Tag-rag saw it, and could not control
himself--for he had got to the end of his first glass of brandy and
water, and (a most unusual procedure with _him_) mixed himself a second
quite _as_ strong as the former.

"Tab! ah, Tab! what _has_ been the matter with you all these months?"
said he, chucking her under the chin--and then he winked his eye at her
and then at Titmouse.

"Papa!" exclaimed Miss Tag-rag, looking down, and blushing up to her
very temples.

"Ah, Titmouse--Titmouse--give me your hand," said Tag-rag; "you'll
forget us all when you're a great man--but we shall always remember
you!"

"You're very good--very!" said Titmouse, cordially returning the
pressure of Tag-rag's hand. At that instant it suddenly occurred to him
to adopt the suggestion of Mr. Gammon. Tag-rag was going on very fast,
indeed, about the disinterested nature of his feelings towards Titmouse;
towards whom, he said, he had always felt just as he did at that
moment--'twas in vain to deny it.

"I'm sure your conduct shows it, sir," commenced Titmouse, feeling a
shudder like that with which a timid bather approaches the margin of the
cold stream. "I could have taken my oath, sir, that when you had heard
what has happened, you would have refused to let me come into your
house!"----

"Ah, ha!--that's _rather_ an odd idea, too!" said Tag-rag, with
good-humored jocularity. "If I felt a true friendship for you as plain
Titmouse, it's so likely I should have _cut_ you just when--ahem! My
dear sir! It was _I_ that thought _you_ wouldn't have come into _my_
house! A likely thing, indeed!"

Titmouse was puzzled. His perceptions, never very quick or clear, were
now undoubtedly somewhat obfuscated with what he had been drinking. In
short, he did not understand that Tag-rag had not understood _him_; and
felt rather baffled.

"What surprising ups and downs there are in life, Mr. Titmouse!" said
Mrs. Tag-rag, respectfully--"they're all sent from above, you may depend
upon it, to _try_ us! No one knows how they'd behave, if as how (in a
manner) they were turned upside down."

"I--I hope, mem, I haven't done anything to show that _I_"----

"Oh! my dear Titmouse," anxiously interrupted Tag-rag, inwardly cursing
his wife, who, finding she always went wrong in her husband's eyes
whenever she spoke a word, determined for the future to stick to her
negus--"The fact is, there's a Mr. Horror here that's for sending all
decent people to----. He's filled my wife there with all sorts of----
nay, if she isn't bursting with cant--so never mind her! _You_ done
anything wrong! I _will_ say this for you--you always was a pattern of
modesty and propriety--your hand, my dear Titmouse!"

"Well--I'm a happy man again," resumed Titmouse, resolved now to go on
with his adventure. "And when did they tell you of it, sir?"

"Oh, a few days ago--a week ago," replied Tag-rag, trying to recollect.

"Why--why--sir--a'n't you mistaken?" inquired Titmouse, with a
depressed, but at the same time a surprised air. "It only happened this
morning, after you left"----

"Eh?--eh?--ah, ha!--What _do_ you mean, Mr. Titmouse?" interrupted
Tag-rag, with a faint attempt at a smile. Mrs. Tag-rag and Miss Tag-rag
also turned exceedingly startled faces towards Titmouse, who felt as if
a house were going to fall down on him.

"Why, sir," he began to cry, (an attempt which was greatly aided by the
maudlin condition to which drink had reduced him,) "till to-day, I
thought I was heir to ten thousand a-year, and it seems I'm not; it's
all a mistake of those cursed people at Saffron Hill!"

Tag-rag's face changed visibly, and showed the desperate shock he had
just sustained. His inward agony was forcing out on his slanting
forehead a dew of perspiration.

"What--a--capital--joke--Mr.--Titmouse--ah, ha!"--he gasped, hastily
passing his handkerchief over his forehead. Titmouse, though greatly
alarmed, stood to his gun pretty steadily.

"I--I wish it was a joke! It's been no joke to _me_, sir. There's
another Tittlebat Titmouse, it seems, in Shoreditch, that's the
right"----

"Who told you this, sir? Pho, I don't--I can't believe it," said
Tag-rag, in a voice tremulous between suppressed rage and fear.

"Too true, though, 'pon my life! It _is_, so help me----!" in the most
earnest and solemn manner.

"How dare you swear before ladies, sir? You're insulting them, sir!"
cried Tag-rag, trembling with rage. "And in _my_ presence, too, sir?
You're not a gentleman!" He suddenly dropped his voice, and in a
trembling and almost beseeching manner, asked Titmouse whether he was
really joking or serious.

"Never more serious in my life, sir; and enough to make me so, sir!"
replied Titmouse, in a lamentable manner.

"You really mean, then, to tell me it's all a mistake, then--and that
you're no more than what you always were?" inquired Tag-rag, with a
desperate attempt to speak calmly.

"Oh yes, sir! Yes!" cried Titmouse, mournfully; "and if you'll only be
so kind as to let me serve you as I used--I'll serve you faithfully! You
know it was no fault of _mine_, sir! They _would_ tell me it was so!"

'Tis impossible to conceive a more disgusting expression than the
repulsive features of Tag-rag wore at that moment, while he gazed in
ominous and agitated silence at Titmouse. His lips quivered, and he
seemed incapable of speaking.

"Oh, ma, I do feel _so_ ill!" faintly exclaimed Miss Tag-rag, turning
deadly pale. Titmouse was on the verge of dropping on his knees and
confessing the trick, greatly agitated at the effect unexpectedly
produced on Miss Tag-rag; when Tag-rag's heavy hand was suddenly placed
on his shoulder, and he whispered in a fierce undertone--"You're an
impostor, sir!" which arrested Titmouse, and made something like a MAN
of him. He was a fearful fool, but he did not want for mere _pluck_; and
now it was roused. Mrs. Tag-rag exclaimed, "Oh, you _shocking_ scamp!"
as she passed Titmouse, with much agitation, and led her daughter out of
the room.

"Then an impostor, sir, a'n't fit company for _you_, of course, sir!"
said Titmouse, rising, and trembling with mingled apprehension and
anger.

"Pay me my five-pound note!" almost shouted Tag-rag, furiously
tightening the grasp by which he held Titmouse's collar.

"Well, sir, and I will, if you'll only take your hand off! Hollo,
sir--What the de---- Leave go, sir! Hands off! Are you going to murder
me? I'll pay you, and done with you, sir," stammered Titmouse:--when a
faint scream was heard, plainly from Miss Tag-rag, overhead, and in
hysterics. Then the seething caldron boiled over. "You _infernal_
scoundrel!" exclaimed Tag-rag, almost choked with fury; and suddenly
seizing Titmouse by the collar, scarce giving him time, in passing, to
get hold of his hat and stick, he urged him along through the passage,
down the gravel walk, threw open the gate, thrust him furiously through
it, and sent after him such a blast of execration, as was almost strong
enough to drive him a hundred yards down the road! Titmouse did not
fully recover his breath or his senses for a long while afterwards. When
he did, the first thing he experienced, was a dreadful disposition
towards sickness; but gradually overcoming it, he felt an inclination to
fall down on his knees in the open road, and worship the sagacious and
admirable GAMMON, who had so exactly predicted what had come to pass!

And now, Mr. Titmouse, for some little time I have done with you.
Away!--give room to your betters. But don't think that I have yet
"rifled _all_ your sweetness," or am _yet_ about to "fling you like a
noisome weed away."




CHAPTER VII.


While the lofty door of a house in Grosvenor Street was yet quivering
under the shock of a previously announced dinner-arrival, one of the two
servants standing behind a carriage which approached from the direction
of Piccadilly, slipped off, and in a twinkling, with a
thun-thun-thunder-under-under, thunder-runder-runder, thun-thun-thun!
and a shrill thrilling _Whir-r-r_ of the bell, announced the arrival of
the Duke of----, the last guest. It was a large and plain carriage, but
perfectly well known; and before the door of the house at which it had
drawn up had been opened, displaying some four or five servants standing
in the hall, in simple but elegant liveries, some half-dozen passengers
had stopped to see get out of the carriage an elderly, middle-sized man,
with a somewhat spare figure, dressed in plain black clothes, with
iron-gray hair, and a countenance which, once seen, was not to be
forgotten. That was a great man; one, the like of whom many previous
centuries had not seen; whose name shot terror into the hearts of all
the enemies of old England all over the world, and fond pride and
admiration into the hearts of his fellow-countrymen.

"A quarter to eleven!" he said, in a quiet tone, to the servant who was
holding open the carriage door--while the bystanders took off their
hats; a courtesy which he acknowledged, as he slowly stepped across the
pavement, by touching his hat in a mechanical sort of way with his
forefinger. The house-door then closed upon him; the handful of
onlookers passed away; off rolled the empty carriage, and all without
was quiet as before. The house was that of Mr. Aubrey, one of the
members for the borough of YATTON, in Yorkshire--a man of rapidly rising
importance in Parliament. Surely his was a pleasant position--that of an
independent country gentleman, a member of one of the most ancient noble
families in England, with a clear unencumbered rent-roll of ten thousand
a-year, and already, in only his thirty-fourth year, the spokesman of
his class, and promising to become one of the ablest debaters in the
House! Parliament having been assembled, in consequence of a particular
emergency, at a much earlier period than usual, the House of Commons, in
which Mr. Aubrey had the evening before delivered a well-timed and
powerful speech, had adjourned for the Christmas recess, the House of
Lords being about to follow its example that evening: an important
division, however, being first expected to take place at a late hour.
Mr. Aubrey was warmly complimented on his success by several of the
select and brilliant circle then assembled; and who were all in high
spirits--on account of a considerable triumph just obtained by their
party, and to which Mr. Aubrey was assured, by even the Duke of----, his
exertions had certainly not a little contributed. While his Grace was
energetically intimating to Mr. Aubrey his opinion to this effect, there
were two lovely women listening to him with intense eagerness--they were
the wife and sister of Mr. Aubrey. The former was a very interesting and
handsome woman--with raven hair, and a complexion of dazzling
fairness--of nearly eight-and-twenty; the latter was a very beautiful
girl, somewhere between twenty and twenty-one. Both were dressed with
the utmost simplicity and elegance. Mrs. Aubrey, most dotingly fond of
her husband, and a blooming young mother of two as charming children as
were to be met with in a day's walk all over both the parks, was, in
character and manners, all pliancy and gentleness; while about Miss
Aubrey there was a dash of spirit which gave an infinite zest to her
beauty. Her blue eyes beamed with the richest expression of feeling--in
short, Catherine Aubrey was, both in face and figure, a downright
English beauty; and she knew--truth must be told--that such she appeared
to the Great Duke, whose cold aquiline eye she often _felt_ to be
settled upon her with satisfaction. The fact was that he had penetrated
at a first glance beneath the mere surface of an arch, sweet, and
winning manner, and detected a certain strength of character in Miss
Aubrey which gave him more than usual interest in her, and spread over
his iron-cast features a pleasant expression, relaxing their sternness.
It might indeed be said, that before her, in his person,

    "Grim-visaged war had smooth'd his wrinkled front."

'Twas a subject for a painter, that delicate and blooming girl, her
auburn hair hanging in careless grace on each side of her white
forehead, while her eyes,

    "That might have sooth'd a tiger's rage,
    Or thaw'd the cold heart of a conqueror,"

were fixed with absorbed interest on the stern and rigid countenance
which she reflected had been, as it were, a thousand times darkened with
the smoke of the grisly battle-field. But I must not forget that there
are others in the room; and among them, standing at a little distance,
is Lord De la Zouch, one of Mr. Aubrey's neighbors in Yorkshire.
Apparently he is listening to a brother peer talking to him very
earnestly about the expected division; but Lord De la Zouch's eye is
fixed on you, lovely Kate--and how little can you imagine what is
passing through his mind! It has just occurred to him that his sudden
arrangement for young Delamere--his only son and heir, come up the day
before from Oxford--to call for him about half-past ten, and take his
place in Mrs. Aubrey's drawing-room, while Lord De la Zouch goes down to
the House--may be attended with certain consequences! He is in truth
speculating on the effect of your beauty bursting suddenly on his
son--who has not seen you for nearly two years! all this gives him
anxiety--but not painful anxiety--for, dear Kate, he knows that your
forehead would wear the ancient coronet of the De la Zouches with grace
and dignity. But Delamere is as yet too young--and if he gets the image
of Catherine Aubrey into his head, it will, fears his father, instantly
cast into the shade and displace all the stern visages of those old
geometers, poets, orators, historians, philosophers, and statesmen, who
ought, in Lord De la Zouch's and his son's tutor's judgment, to occupy
exclusively the head of the aforesaid Delamere for some five years to
come. That youngster--happy fellow!--frank, high-spirited, and
enthusiastic--and handsome to boot--was heir to an ancient title and
very great estates; all that his father had considered in looking out
for an alliance was--youth, health, beauty, blood--here they all
were;--and _fortune_ too--bah! what did it signify to his son--but at
any rate 'twas not to be thought of for some years.

"Suppose," said he, aloud, though in a musing manner, "one were to
say--twenty-four"----

"_Twenty-four!_" echoed his companion, with amazement; "my dear De la
Zouch, what the deuce do you mean? _Eighty_-four at the very lowest!"

"Eh? what? oh--yes of course--I should say ninety--I mean--hem!--_they_
will muster about twenty-four only."

"Ah--I beg your pardon!--_there_ you're right, I dare say."--Here the
announcement of dinner put an end to the colloquy of the two statesmen.
Lord De la Zouch led down Miss Aubrey with an air of the most delicate
and cordial courtesy; and felt almost disposed, in the heat of the
moment, to tell her that he had arranged all in his own mind--that if
_she_ willed it, she had _his_ hearty consent to become the future Lady
De la Zouch. He was himself the eleventh who had come to the title in
direct descent from father to son; 'twas a point he was not a little
nervous and anxious about--he detested collateral succession--and he
made himself infinitely agreeable to Miss Aubrey as he sat beside her at
dinner! The Duke of---- sat on the right hand side of Mrs. Aubrey,
seemingly in high spirits, and she appeared proud enough of her
supporter. It was a delightful dinner-party, elegant without
ostentation, and select without pretence of exclusiveness. All were
cheerful and animated, not merely on account of the over-night's
parliamentary victory, which I have already alluded to, but also in
contemplation of the coming Christmas; how, and where, and with whom
each was to spend that "righte merrie season," being the chief topic of
conversation. As there was nothing peculiar in the dinner, and as I have
no turn for describing such matters in detail--the clatter of plate, the
jingling of silver, the sparkling of wines, and so forth--I shall
request the reader to imagine himself led by me quietly out of the
dining-room into the library--thus escaping from all the bustle and
hubbub attendant upon such an entertainment as is going on in front of
the house. We shall be alone in the library--here it is; we enter it,
and shut the door. 'Tis a spacious room, all the sides covered with
books, of which Mr. Aubrey is a great collector--and the clear red fire
(which we must presently replenish, or it will go out) is shedding a
subdued ruddy light on all the objects in the room, very favorable for
our purpose. The ample table is covered with books and papers; and
there is an antique-looking arm-chair drawn opposite to the fire, in
which Mr. Aubrey has been indulging in a long revery till the moment of
quitting it to go and dress for dinner. This chair I shall sit in
myself; you may draw out from the recess for yourself one of two little
sloping easy-chairs, which have been placed there by Mrs. and Miss
Aubrey for their own sole use, considering that they are excellent
judges of the period at which Mr. Aubrey has been long enough alone, and
at which they should come in and gossip with him. We may as well draw
the dusky green curtains across the window, through which the moon
shines at present rather too brightly.--So now, after coaxing up the
fire, I will proceed to tell you a little bit of pleasant family
history.

The Aubreys are a Yorkshire family--the younger branch of the ancient
and noble family of the Dreddlingtons. Their residence, YATTON, is in
the north-eastern part of the county, not above fifteen or twenty miles
from the sea. The hall is one of those old structures, the sight of
which throws you back a couple of centuries in our English history. It
stands in a park, crowded with trees, many of them of great age and
size, and under which two or three hundred head of deer perform their
capricious and graceful gambols. In approaching from London, you strike
off from the great north road into a broad by-way; after going down
which for about a mile, you come to a straggling little village called
Yatton, at the farther extremity of which stands a little aged gray
church, with a tall thin spire; an immense yew-tree, with a kind of
friendly gloom, overshadowing, in the little churchyard, nearly half the
graves. Rather in the rear of the church is the vicarage-house, snug and
sheltered by a line of fir-trees. After walking on about eighty yards,
you come to high park-gates, and see a lodge just within, on the left
hand side, sheltered by an elm-tree. Having passed through these gates,
you wind your way for about two-thirds of a mile along a gravel walk,
among the thickening trees, till you come to a ponderous old crumbling
looking red brick gateway of the time of Henry VII., with one or two
deeply set stone windows in the turrets, and mouldering stone-capped
battlements peeping through high-climbing ivy. There is an old
escutcheon immediately over the point of the arch; and as you pass
underneath, if you look up, you can plainly see the groove of the old
portcullis still remaining. Having passed under this castellated
remnant, you enter a kind of court formed by a high wall completely
covered with ivy, running along in a line from the right hand turret of
the gateway till it joins the house. Along its course are a number of
yew-trees. In the centre of the open space is a quaintly disposed
grass-plot, dotted about with stunted box, and in the centre of that
stands a weather-beaten stone sundial.

The house itself is a large irregular pile of dull red brickwork, with
great stacks of chimneys in the rear; the body of the building has
evidently been erected at different times. Some part is evidently in the
style of Queen Elizabeth's reign, another in that of Queen Anne; and it
is plain that on the site of the present structure has formerly stood a
castle. There are, indeed, traces of the old moat still visible round
the rear of the house. One of the ancient towers, with small deep stone
windows, still remains, giving its venerable support to the right hand
extremity of the building, as you stand with your face to the door. The
long frontage of the house consists of two huge masses of dusky-red
brickwork, (you can hardly call them _wings_,) connected together by a
lower building in the centre, which contains the hall. There are three
or four rows of long thin deep windows, with heavy-looking wooden
sashes. The high-pitched roof is of red tiles, and has deep projecting
eaves, forming, in fact, a bold wooden cornice running along the whole
length of the building, which is some two or three stories high. At the
left extremity stands a clump of ancient cedars of Lebanon, feathering
in evergreen beauty down to the ground. The hall is large and lofty; the
floor is of polished oak, almost the whole of which is covered with
thick matting; it is wainscoted all round with black oak; some seven or
eight full-length pictures, evidently of considerable antiquity, being
let into the panels. Quaint figures these are to be sure; and if they
resembled the ancestors of the Aubrey family, those ancestors must have
been singular and startling persons! The faces are quite white and
staring--all as if in wonder; and they have such long thin legs! some of
them ending in sharp-pointed shoes. On each side of the ample fireplace
stands a figure in full armor; and there are also ranged along the wall
old helmets, cuirasses, swords, lances, battle-axes, and cross-bows, the
very idea of wearing, wielding, and handling which, makes your arms
ache, while you exclaim, "they _must_ have been giants in those days!"
On one side of this hall, a door opens into the dining-room, beyond
which is the library; on the other side a door leads you into a noble
room, now called the drawing-room, where stands a very fine organ. Out
of both the dining-room and drawing-room you pass up a staircase
contained in an old square tower; two sides of each of them, opening on
the quadrangle, lead into a gallery running round it, and into which all
the bed-rooms open.

But I need not go into further detail. Altogether it is truly a fine old
mansion. Its only constant occupant is Mrs. Aubrey, the mother of Mr.
Aubrey, in whose library we are now seated. She is a widow, having
survived her husband, who twice was one of the county members, about
fifteen years. Mr. Aubrey is her first-born child, Miss Aubrey her last;
four intervening children rest prematurely in the grave--and the grief
and suffering consequent upon all these bereavements have sadly shaken
her constitution, and made her, both in actual health, and in
appearance, at least ten years older than she really is--for she has, in
point of fact, not long since entered her sixtieth year. What a blessed
life she leads at Yatton! Her serene and cheerful temper makes every one
happy about her; and her charity is unbounded, but dispensed with a just
discrimination. One way or another, almost a fourth of the village are
direct pensioners upon her bounty. You have only to mention the name of
Madam Aubrey, the lady of Yatton, to witness involuntary homage paid to
her virtues. Her word is law; and well indeed it may be. While Mr.
Aubrey, her husband, was, to the last, somewhat stern in his temper and
reserved in his habits, bearing withal a spotless and lofty character,
_she_ was always what she still is, meek, gentle, accessible,
charitable, and pious. On his death she withdrew from the world, and has
ever since resided at Yatton--never having quitted it for a single day.
There are in the vicinity one or two stately families, with ancient
name, sounding title, and great possessions; but for ten miles round
Yatton, old Madam Aubrey, the squire's mother, is the name that is
enshrined in people's kindliest and most grateful feelings, and receives
their readiest homage. 'Tis perhaps a very small matter to mention, but
there is at the hall an old white mare, Peggy, that for these twenty
years, in all weathers, hath been the bearer of Madam's bounty.
Thousands of times hath she carried Jacob Jones (now a pensioned
servant, whose hair is as white as Peggy's) all over the estate, and
also oft beyond it, with comfortable matters for the sick and poor. Most
commonly there are a couple of stone bottles filled with cowslip,
currant, ginger, or elderberry wine, slung before him over the well-worn
saddle--to the carrying of which Peggy has got so accustomed, that she
does not go comfortably without them. She has so fallen into the habits
of old Jones, who is an inveterate gossip, (Madam having helped to make
him such by the numerous inquiries she makes of him every morning as to
every one in the village and on the estate, and which inquiries he
_must_ have the means of answering,) that, slowly as she jogs along, if
ever she meets or is overtaken by any one, she stops of her own accord,
as if to hear what they and her rider have to say to one another. She is
a great favorite with all, and gets a mouthful of hay or grass at every
place she stops at, either from the children or the old people. When
poor Peggy comes to die, (and she is getting feeble, now,) she will be
missed by all the folk round Yatton! Madam Aubrey, growing, I am sorry
to say, less able to exert herself, does not go about as much as she
used, betaking herself, therefore, oftener and oftener, to the old
family coach; and when she is going to drive about the neighborhood, you
may almost always see it stop at the vicarage for old Dr. Tatham, who
generally accompanies her. On these occasions she always has in the
carriage a black velvet bag containing Testaments and Prayer-books,
which are principally distributed as rewards to those whom the parson
can recommend as deserving of them. For these five-and-twenty years she
has never missed giving a copy of each to every child in the village and
on the estate, on its being confirmed; and the old lady looks round very
keenly every Sunday, from her pew, to see that these Bibles and
Prayer-books are reverently used. I could go on for an hour and longer,
telling you these and other such matters of this exemplary lady; but we
shall by and by have some opportunities of seeing and knowing more of
her personally. Her features are delicate, and have been very handsome;
and in manner she is very calm, and quiet, and dignified. She looks all
that you would expect from what I have told you. The briskness of youth,
the sedate firmness of middle-age, have years since given place, as you
will see with some pain, to the feebleness produced by ill health and
mental suffering--for she mourned grievously after those whom she had
lost! Oh! how she dotes upon her surviving son and daughter! And are
they not worthy of such a mother?

Mr. Aubrey is in his thirty-fourth year; and inherits the mental
qualities of both his parents--the demeanor and person of his father. He
has a reserve which is not cynical, but only diffident; yet it gives
him, at least at first sight, and till you have become familiar with his
features, which are of a cast at once refined and aristocratic, yet full
of goodness--an air of hauteur, which is very--very far from his real
nature. He has in truth the soft heart and benignant temper of his
mother, joined with the masculine firmness of character which belonged
to his father; which, however, is in danger of being seriously impaired
by _inaction_. Sensitive he is, perhaps to a fault. There is a tone of
melancholy in his composition, which has probably increased upon him
from his severe studies, ever since his youth. He is a man of superior
intellect; a capital scholar; took the highest honor at Oxford: and has
since justified the expectations which were then entertained of him. He
has made several really valuable contributions to historic
literature--indeed, I think he is even now engaged upon some researches
calculated to throw much light upon the obscure origin of several of our
political institutions. He has entered upon _politics_ with
uncommon--perhaps with an excessive--ardor. I think he is likely to make
an eminent figure in Parliament; for he is a man of very clear head,
very patient, of business-like habits, ready in debate, and, moreover,
has at once an impressive and engaging delivery as a public speaker. He
is generous and charitable as his admirable mother, and careless, even
to a fault, of his pecuniary interests. He is a man of perfect
simplicity and purity of character. Above all, his virtues are the
virtues which have been sublimed by Christianity--as it were, the cold
embers of morality warmed into religion. He stands happily equidistant
from infidelity and fanaticism. He has looked for light from above, and
has heard a voice saying, "_This_ is the way, walk thou in it." His
piety is the real source of that happy consistent dignity, and content,
and firmness, which have earned him the respect of all who know him, and
will bear him through whatever may befall him. He who standeth upon this
rock cannot be moved, perhaps not even touched, by the surges of worldly
reverses--of difficulty and distress! In manner Mr. Aubrey is calm and
gentlemanlike; in person he is rather above the middle height, and of
slight make. From the way in which his clothes hang about him, a certain
sharpness at his shoulders catching the eye of an observer--you would
feel an anxiety about his health, which would be increased by hearing of
the mortality in his family; and your thoughts are perhaps pointed in
the same direction, by a glance at his long, thin, delicate, white
hands. His countenance has a serene manliness about it when in repose,
and great acuteness and vivacity when animated. His hair, not very full,
is black as jet, his forehead ample and marked; and his eyes are the
exponents of perfect sincerity and acuteness.

Mr. Aubrey has been married about six years; 'twas a case of love at
first sight. Chance (so to speak) threw him in the way of Agnes St.
Clair, within a few weeks after she had been bereaved of her only
parent, Colonel St. Clair, a man of old but impoverished family, who
fell in the Peninsular war. Had he lived only a month or two longer, he
would have succeeded to a considerable estate; as it was, he left his
only child comparatively penniless; but Heaven had endowed her with
personal beauty, with a lovely disposition, and superior understanding.
It was not till after a long and anxious wooing, backed by the cordial
entreaties of Mrs. Aubrey, that Miss St. Clair consented to become the
wife of a man, who, to this hour, loves her with all the passionate
ardor with which she had first inspired him. And richly she deserves his
love! She does, indeed, dote upon him; she studies, or rather, perhaps,
anticipates his every wish; in short, had the whole sex been searched
for one calculated to make happy the morbidly fastidious Aubrey, the
choice must surely have fallen on Miss St. Clair; a woman whose temper,
whose tastes, and whose manners were at once in delicate and harmonizing
unison and contrast with his own. She has hitherto brought him but two
children--and those very beautiful children, too--a boy between four and
five years old, and a girl about two years old. If I were to hint my own
impressions, I should say there was a probability---- be that, however,
as it may, 't is an affair we have nothing to do with at present.

Of Catherine Aubrey you had a momentary moonlight glimpse at a former
period of this history;[14] and you have seen her this evening under
other, and perhaps not less interesting circumstances. Now, where have
you beheld a more exquisite specimen of budding womanhood? but I feel
that I shall get extravagant if I begin to dwell upon her charms. You
have seen her--judge for yourself; but you do not _know_ her as I do;
and I shall tell you that her personal beauty is but a faint emblem of
the beauties of her mind and character. She is Aubrey's youngest--now
his only sister; and he cherishes her with the tenderest and fondest
affection. Neither he, nor his mother--with whom she spends her time
alternately--can bear to part with her for ever so short an interval.
She is the gay, romping playmate of the little Aubreys; the demure
secretary and treasurer of her mother. I say _demure_, for there is a
sly humor and archness in Kate's composition, which flickers about even
her gravest moods. She is calculated equally for the seclusion of Yatton
and the splendid atmosphere of Almack's; but for the latter she seems at
present to have little inclination. Kate is a girl of decided character,
of strong sense, of high principle; all of which are irradiated, not
overborne, by her sparkling vivacity of temperament. She has real
talent; and her mind has been trained, and her tastes directed, with
affectionate skill and vigilance by her gifted brother. She has many
accomplishments; but the only one I shall choose here to name is--music.
_She_ was one to sing and play before a man of the most fastidious taste
and genius! I defy any man to hear the rich tones of Miss Aubrey's voice
without feeling his heart moved. Music is with her a matter not of _art_
but of _feeling_--of passionate feeling; but hark!--hush!--surely--yes,
that is Miss Aubrey's voice--yes, that is her clear and brilliant touch;
the ladies have ascended to the drawing-room, and we must presently
follow them. How time has passed! I had a great deal more to tell you
about the family, but we must take some other opportunity.

Yes, it _is_ Miss Aubrey, playing on the new and superb piano given by
her brother last week to Mrs. Aubrey. Do you see with what a careless
grace and ease she is giving a very sweet but difficult composition of
Haydn? The lady who is standing by her to turn over her music, is the
celebrated Countess of Lydsdale. She is still young and beautiful; but
beside Miss Aubrey she presents a somewhat painful contrast! 'T is all
the difference between an artificial and a natural flower. Poor Lady
Lydsdale! you are not happy with all your fashion and splendor; the
glitter of your diamonds cannot compensate for the loss of the sparkling
spirits of a younger day; they pale their ineffectual fires beside the
fresh and joyous spirit of Catherine Aubrey! You sigh----

"Now, I'll sing you quite a new thing," said Miss Aubrey, starting up,
and turning over her portfolio till she came to a sheet of paper, on
which were some verses in her own handwriting, and with which she sat
down again before the piano: "The words were written by my brother, and
I have found an old air that exactly suits them!" Here her fingers,
wandering lightly and softly over the keys, gave forth a beautiful
symphony in the minor; after which, with a rich and soft voice, she sang
the following:--

    PEACE.

    I.

        Where, O where
      Hath gentle PEACE found rest?
    Builds she in bower of lady fair?--
    But LOVE--he hath possession there;
      Not long is _she_ the guest.

    II.

        Sits she crown'd
      Beneath a pictured dome?
    But there AMBITION keeps his ground,
    And Fear and Envy skulk around;
      _This_ cannot be her home.

    III.

        Will she hide
      In scholar's pensive cell?
    But _he_ already hath his bride:
    Him MELANCHOLY sits beside--
      With her she may not dwell.

    IV.

        Now and then,
      Peace, wandering, lays her head
    On regal couch, in captive's den--
    But nowhere finds she rest with men,
      Or only with the dead!

To these words, trembling on the beautiful lips of Miss Aubrey, was
listening an unperceived auditor, with eyes devouring her every feature,
and ears absorbing every tone of her thrilling voice. It was young
Delamere, who had, only a moment or two before Miss Aubrey had commenced
singing the above lines, alighted from his father's carriage, which was
then waiting at the door to carry off Lord De la Zouch to the House of
Lords. Arrested by the rich voice of the singer, he stopped short before
he had entered the drawing-room in which she sat, and stepping to a
corner where he was hid from view, though he could distinctly see Miss
Aubrey, there he remained as if rooted to the spot. He, too, had a soul
for music; and the exquisite manner in which Miss Aubrey gave the last
verse, called up before his excited fancy the vivid image of a dove
fluttering with agitated uncertainty over the sea of human life; even
like the dove over the waters enveloping the earth in olden time. The
mournful minor into which she threw the last two lines, excited a heart
susceptible of the liveliest emotions to a degree which it required some
effort to control, and almost a tear to relieve. When Miss Aubrey had
quitted the piano, Mrs. Aubrey followed, and gave a very delicate sonata
from Haydn. Then sat down Lady Lydsdale, and dashed off, in an
exceedingly brilliant style, a _scena_ from the new opera, which quickly
reduced the excited feelings of Delamere to a pitch admitting of his
presenting himself! While this lowering process was going on, Delamere
took down a small volume from a tasteful little cabinet of books
immediately behind him. It was Spenser's _Faery Queen_. He found many
pencil-marks, evidently made by a light female hand; and turning to the
fly-leaf, beheld the name of "_Catherine Aubrey_." His heart fluttered;
he turned towards the piano, and beheld the graceful figure of Miss
Aubrey standing beside Lady Lydsdale, in an attitude of delighted
earnestness--for her ladyship was undoubtedly a very brilliant
performer--totally unconscious of the admiring eye which was fixed upon
her. After gazing at her for some moments, he gently pressed the
autograph to his lips; and solemnly vowed within himself, in the most
deliberate manner possible, that if he could not marry Kate Aubrey, he
would never marry anybody; he would, moreover, quit England forever; and
deposit a broken heart in a foreign grave--and so forth. Thus calmly
resolved--or rather to such a resolution did his thoughts tend--that
sedate person, the Honorable Geoffrey Lovel Delamere. He was a
high-spirited, frank-hearted fellow; and, like a good-natured fool, whom
bitter knowledge of the world has not cooled down into contempt for a
very considerable portion of it, trusted and loved almost every one whom
he saw. At that moment there was only one person in the whole world that
he hated, viz. the miserable individual--if any such there were--who
might have happened to forestall him in the affections of Miss Aubrey.
The bare idea made his breath come and go quickly, and his cheek flush.
Why, he felt that he had a sort of _right_ to Miss Aubrey's heart; for
had they not been born, and had they not lived almost all their lives,
within a few miles of each other? Had they not often played
together?--were not their family estates almost contiguous?--Delamere
advanced into the room, assuming as unconcerned an air as he could; but
he felt not a little tried when Miss Aubrey, on seeing him, gayly and
frankly extended her hand to him, supposing him to have only the moment
before entered the house. Poor Delamere's hand slightly quivered as he
felt it clasping the soft lilied fingers of her whom he had thus
resolved to make his wife: what would he not have given to have carried
them to his lips! Now, if I were to say that in the course of that
evening, Miss Aubrey did not form a kind--of a sort--of a faint--notion
of the possible state of matters with young Delamere, I should not be
treating the reader with that eminent degree of candor for which I think
he, or she, is at present disposed to give me credit. But Kate was
deeply skilled in human nature, and promptly settled the matter by one
very just reflection, viz. that Delamere was, in contemplation of law, a
mere _infant_--_i. e._ he wanted yet several weeks of twenty-one! and,
therefore, that it was not likely that, &c. &c. &c. And,
besides--pooh!--pooh!--'t is a mere _boy_, at College--how
ridiculous!--So she gave herself no trouble about the affair; exhibited
no symptoms of caution or coyness, but conducted herself just as if he
had not been present.

He was a handsome young fellow, too!----

During the evening, Mr. Delamere took an opportunity of asking Miss
Aubrey who wrote the verses to which he pointed, as they lay on the
piano. The handwriting, she said, was hers, but the verses were composed
by her brother. He asked for the copy, with a slight trepidation. She
readily gave it to him--he receiving it with (as he supposed) a mighty
unconcerned air. He read it over that night, before getting into bed, at
least six times; and it was the very first thing he looked at on getting
out of bed in the morning. Now Miss Aubrey certainly wrote an elegant
hand--but as for _character_, of course it had none. He could scarcely
have distinguished it from the writing of any of his cousins or
friends;--How should he? All women are taught the same hard, angular,
uniform style--but good, bad, or indifferent, this was _Kate Aubrey's_
handwriting--and her pretty hand had rested on the paper while
writing--that was enough. He resolved to turn the verses into every kind
of Greek and Latin metre he knew of--

In short, that here was a "course of true love" _opened_, seems pretty
evident: but whether it will "run smooth" is another matter.

Their guests having at length departed, Mr. Aubrey, his wife, and
sister, soon afterwards rose to retire. He went, very sleepy, straight
to his dressing-room; they to the nursery--(a constant and laudable
custom with them)--to see how the children were going on, as far as
could be learned from the drowsy attendants of the aforesaid children.
Little Aubrey would have reminded you of one of the exquisite sketches
of children's heads by Reynolds or Lawrence, as he lay breathing
imperceptibly, with his rich flowing hair spread upon the pillow, in
which his face was partly hid, and his arms stretched out. Mrs. Aubrey
put her finger into one of his hands, which was half open, and which
closed as it were instinctively upon it, with a gentle pressure.
"Look--only look--Kate!" softly whispered Mrs. Aubrey. Miss Aubrey
leaned forward and kissed his little cheek with an ardor which almost
awoke him. After a glance at a tiny head partly visible above the
clothes, in an adjoining bed, and looking like a rosebud almost entirely
hid among the leaves, they withdrew.

"The little loves!--how one's heart thrills with looking at them!" said
Miss Aubrey as they descended. "Kate!" whispered Mrs. Aubrey, with an
arch smile, as they stood at their respective chamber doors, which
adjoined, "Mr. Delamere is improved--is not he?--Ah, Kate! Kate!--I
understand!"

"Agnes, how can you"--hastily answered Miss Aubrey, with cheeks suddenly
crimsoned. "I never heard such nonsense"----

"Night, night, Kate! think over it!" said Mrs. Aubrey, and kissing her
beautiful sister-in-law, the next moment the blooming wife had entered
her bedroom. Miss Aubrey slipped into her dressing-room, where Harriet,
her maid, was sitting asleep before the fire. Her lovely mistress did
not for a few minutes awake her; but placing her candlestick on the
toilet table, stood in a musing attitude.

"It's so perfectly _ridiculous_" at length she said aloud; and up
started her maid. Within half an hour Miss Aubrey was in bed, but by no
means asleep!

The next morning, about eleven o'clock, Mr. Aubrey was seated in the
library, in momentary expectation of his letters; and a few moments
before the postman's _rat-tat_ was heard, Mrs. and Miss Aubrey made
their appearance, as was their wont, in expectation of anything which
might have upon the cover, in addition to the address--

     "CHARLES AUBREY, ESQ., M. P.," &c. &c. &c.,

the words, "Mrs. Aubrey," or "Miss Aubrey," in the corner. In addition
to this, 'twas not an unpleasant thing to skim over the contents of
_his_ letters! as one by one he opened them, and laid them aside; for
both these fair creatures were daughters of Eve, and inherited a
_little_ of her curiosity. Mr. Aubrey was always somewhat nervous and
fidgety on such occasions, and wished them gone; but they only laughed
at him, so he was fain to put up with them. On this morning there were
more than Mr. Aubrey's usual number of letters; and in casting her eye
over them, Mrs. Aubrey suddenly took up one that challenged attention;
it bore a black seal, had a deep black bordering, and bore the frank of
Lord Alkmond, at whose house in Shropshire they had for months been
engaged to spend the ensuing Christmas, and were intending to set off on
their visit the very next day. The ominous missive was soon torn open;
it was from Lord Alkmond himself, who in a few hurried lines announced
the sudden death of his brother; so that there was an end of their visit
to the Priory.

"Well!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, calmly, rising after a pause, and standing
with his back to the fire, in a musing posture.

"Has he left any family, Charles?" inquired Mrs. Aubrey, with a sigh,
her eyes still fixed on the letter.

"I--I really don't know--poor fellow! We lose a vote for Fellington--we
shall, to a certainty," he added, with an air of chagrin visibly
stealing over his features.

"How politics harden the heart, Charles! Just at _this_ moment to
be"---- quoth Mrs. Aubrey.

"It _is_ too bad, Agnes, I own--but you see," said Mr. Aubrey,
affectionately; suddenly, however, he broke off--"stay, I don't know
either, for there's the Grassingham interest come into the field since
the last"----

"Charles, I do really almost think," exclaimed Mrs. Aubrey with sudden
emotion, stepping to his side, and throwing her arms round him
affectionately, "that if _I_ were to die, I should be forgotten in a
fortnight if the House were sitting"----

"How _can_ you say such things, my love?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, kissing
her forehead.

"When Agnes was born, you know," she murmured inarticulately. Her
husband folded her tenderly in his arms in silence. On the occasion she
alluded to, he had nearly lost her; and they both had reason to expect
that another similar season of peril was not _very_ distant.

"Now, Charles, you _can't_ escape," said Miss Aubrey, presently,
assuming a cheerful tone; "now for dear old Yatton!"----

"Yes, Yatton! Positively you must!" added Mrs. Aubrey, smiling through
her tears.

"What! Go to Yatton?" said Mr. Aubrey, shaking his head and smiling.
"Nonsense! I--i--t ca--n't--be--done!--Why, we must set off to-morrow!
They've had no warning!"

"What warning does mamma require, Charles?" inquired his sister,
eagerly. "Isn't the dear old place always in apple-pie order?"

"How you love the 'dear old place,' Kate!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, in such
an affectionate tone as brought his sister in an instant to his side, to
urge on her suit; and there stood the lord of Yatton embraced by these
two beautiful women, his own heart (_inter nos_) seconding every word
they uttered.

"How my mother would stare!" said he at length, irresolutely, looking
from one to the other, and smiling at their eagerness.

"What a bustle everything will be in!" exclaimed Kate. "I fancy I'm
there already! The great blazing fires--the holly and mistletoe. We must
all go, Charles--children and all!"

"Why, really, I hardly know"---- said Mr. Aubrey, hesitatingly.

"Oh! _I've_ settled it all," quoth Kate, seeing that she had gained her
point, and resolved to press her advantage, "and, what's more, we've no
time to lose; this is Tuesday,--Christmas-day is Saturday--we must of
course stop a night on the way; but hadn't we better have Griffiths in,
to arrange all?" Mr. Aubrey laughed--and--rang the bell.

"Request Mr. Griffiths to come to me," said he to the servant who
answered the summons.

Within a very few minutes that respectable functionary had made his
appearance and received his instructions. The march to Shropshire was
countermanded--and hey! for Yatton!--for which they were to start the
next day about noon. Mr. Griffiths' first step was to pack off Sam, Mr.
Aubrey's groom, by the Tally-ho, the first coach to York, starting at
two o'clock that very day, with letters announcing the immediate arrival
of the family. These orders were received by Sam, (who had been born and
bred at Yatton,) while he was bestowing, with vehement sibilation, his
customary civilities on a favorite mare of his master's. Down dropped
his currycomb; he jumped into the air; snapped his fingers; then he
threw his arms round Jenny, and tickled her under the chin. "Dang it,"
said he, as he threw her another feed of oats, "I wish thee were going
wi' me--dang'd if I don't!" Then he hastily made himself "a _bit_ tidy;"
presented himself very respectfully before Mr. Griffiths, to receive the
wherewithal to pay his fare; and having obtained it, off he scampered to
the Bull and Mouth, as if it had been a neck-and-neck race between him
and all London, which should get down to Yorkshire first. A little after
one o'clock, his packet of letters was delivered to him; and within
another hour Sam was to be seen (quite comfortable, with a draught of
spiced ale given him by the cook, to make his hasty dinner "sit well")
on the top of the Tally-ho, rattling rapidly along the great north road.

"Come, Kate," said Mrs. Aubrey, entering Miss Aubrey's room, where she
was giving directions to her maid, "I've ordered the carriage to be at
the door as soon as it can be got ready; we must go off to
Coutts'--see!" She held in her hand two slips of paper, one of which she
gave Miss Aubrey. 'Twas a check for one hundred pounds--her brother's
usual Christmas-box--"and then we've a quantity of little matters to
buy this afternoon. Come, Kate, quick! quick!"

Now, poor Kate had spent nearly all her money, which circumstance,
connected with another that I shall shortly mention, had given her not a
little concern. At her earnest request, her brother had, about a year
before, built her a nice little school, capable of containing some
eighteen or twenty girls, on a slip of land between the vicarage and the
park wall of Yatton, and old Mrs. Aubrey and her daughter found a
resident schoolmistress, and, in fact, supported the little
establishment, which, at the time I am speaking of, contained some
seventeen or eighteen of the villagers' younger children. Miss Aubrey
took a prodigious interest in this little school, scarce a day passing
without her visiting it when she was at Yatton; and what Kate wanted,
was the luxury of giving a Christmas present to both mistress and
scholars. That, however, she would have had some difficulty in effecting
but for this her brother's timely present, which had quite set her heart
at ease. On their return, the carriage was crowded with the things they
had been purchasing--articles of clothing for the feebler old villagers;
work-boxes, samplers, books, testaments, prayer-books, &c. &c. &c., for
the school; the sight of which, I can assure the reader, made Kate far
happier than if they had been the costliest articles of dress and
jewelry.

The next day was a very pleasant one for travelling--"frosty, but
kindly." About one o'clock there might have been seen standing before
the door the roomy yellow family carriage, with four post-horses. All
was in travelling trim. In the rumble sat Mr. Aubrey's valet and Mrs.
Aubrey's maid--Miss Aubrey's, and one of the nursery-maids, going down
by the coach which had carried Sam--the Tally-ho. The coach-box was
piled up with that sort of luggage which, by its lightness and bulk,
denotes lady-travelling: inside were Mrs. and Miss Aubrey muffled in
furs, shawls, and pelisses; a nursery-maid, with little Master and Miss
Aubrey, equally well protected from the cold; and the vacant seat
awaited Mr. Aubrey, who at length made his appearance, having been
engaged till the latest moment in giving and repeating specific
instructions concerning the forwarding of his letters and papers. As
soon as he had taken his place, and all had been snugly disposed within,
the steps were doubled up, the door was closed, the windows were drawn
up--crack! crack! went the whips of the two postilions, and away rolled
the carriage over the dry hard pavement.

"Now that's what I calls doing it _uncommon_ comfortable," said a
pot-boy to one of the footmen at an adjoining house, where he was
delivering the porter for the servants' dinner; "how _werry_ nice and
snug them two looks in the rumble behind!"

"_We_ goes to-morrow," carelessly replied the gentleman whom he had
addressed.

"It's a fine thing to be gentlefolk," said the boy, taking up his
pot-board.

"Pretty well--but one tires of it in time!" drawled the footman,
twitching up his shirt-collar.

On drawing up to the posting-house, which was within about forty miles
of Yatton, the Aubreys found a carriage and four just ready to start,
after changing horses; and whose should this prove to be, but Lord De la
Zouch's, containing himself, his lady, and his son, Mr. Delamere! His
lordship and his son both alighted on accidentally discovering who had
overtaken them; and coming up to Mr. Aubrey's carriage windows,
exchanged surprised and cordial greetings with its occupants--whom Lord
De la Zouch imagined to have been by this time on their way to
Shropshire. Mr. Delamere manifested a surprising eagerness about the
welfare of little Agnes Aubrey, who happened to be lying fast asleep in
Miss Aubrey's lap; but the evening was fast advancing, and both the
travelling parties had yet before them a considerable portion of their
journey. After a hasty promise on the part of each to dine with the
other, before returning to town for the season--a promise which _Mr.
Delamere_ at all events resolved should not be lost sight of--they
parted. 'Twas eight o'clock before Mr. Aubrey's eye, which had been for
some time on the look-out, caught sight of Yatton woods; and when it
did, his heart yearned towards them. The moon shone brightly and
cheerily, and it was pleasant to listen to the quickening clattering
tramp of the horses upon the dry hard highway, as the travellers rapidly
neared a spot endeared to them by every early and tender association.
When they had got within half a mile of the village, they overtook the
worthy vicar, who had mounted his nag, and had been out on the road to
meet the expected comers, for an hour before. Mr. Aubrey roused Mrs.
Aubrey from her nap, to point out Dr. Tatham, who by that time was
cantering along beside the open window. 'Twas refreshing to see the
cheerful old man--who looked as ruddy and hearty as ever.

"God bless you all! All well?" he exclaimed, riding close to the window.

"Yes; but how is my mother?" inquired Mr. Aubrey.

"High spirits--high spirits! Was with her this afternoon! Have not seen
her better for years! So surprised! Ah! here's an old friend--Hector!"

"Bow-wow-wow-wow! Bow--Bow-wow!"

"Papa! papa!" exclaimed the voice of little Charles, struggling to get
on his father's lap to look out of the window, "that is Hector! I know
it is! He is come to see _me_! I want to look at him."

Mr. Aubrey lifted him up as he desired, and a huge black-and-white
Newfoundland dog almost leaped up to the window, at sight of him
clapping his little hands, as if in eager recognition, and then
scampered and bounded about in all directions, barking most
boisterously, to the infinite delight of little Aubrey. This messenger
had been sent on by Sam, the groom; who, having been on the look-out for
the travellers for some time, the moment he had caught sight of the
carriage, pelted down the village through the park, at top speed, up to
the Hall, there to communicate the good news of their safe arrival. The
travellers thought that the village had never looked so pretty and
picturesque before. The sound of the carriage dashing through it, called
all the cottagers to their doors, where they stood bowing and
courtesying. It soon reached the park-gates, which were thrown wide open
in readiness for its entrance. As they passed the church, they heard its
little bells ringing a merry peal to welcome their arrival. Its faint
chimes went to their very hearts.

"My darling Agnes, here we are again in the old place," said Mr. Aubrey,
in a joyous tone, affectionately kissing Mrs. Aubrey and his sister, as,
after having wound their way up the park at almost a gallop, they heard
themselves rattling over the stone pavement immediately under the old
turreted gateway. On approaching it, they saw lights glancing about in
the Hall windows; and before they had drawn up, the great door was
thrown open, and several servants (one or two of them gray-headed) made
their appearance, eager to release the travellers from their long
confinement. A great wood fire was crackling and blazing in the ample
fireplace in the hall opposite the door, casting a right pleasant and
cheerful light over the various antique objects ranged round the walls;
but the object on which Mr. Aubrey's eye instantly settled was the
venerable figure of his mother, standing beside the fireplace with one
or two female attendants. The moment that the carriage door was opened,
he stepped quickly out, (nearly tumbling, by the way, over Hector, who
appeared to think that the carriage door had been opened only to enable
him to jump into it, which he prepared to do.)

"God bless you, Madam!" said Mr. Aubrey, tenderly, as he received his
mother's fervent but silent greeting, and imagined that the arms folded
round him were somewhat feebler than when he had last felt them
embracing him! With similar affection was the good old lady received by
her daughter and daughter-in-law.

"Where is my pony, grandmamma?" quoth little Aubrey, running up to her,
(he had been kept quiet, from time to time, during the last eighty miles
or so, by the mention of the aforesaid pony, which had been sent to the
Hall as a present to him some weeks before.) "Where is it? I want to see
my little pony directly! Mamma says you have got a little pony for me
with a long tail; I _must_ see it before I go to bed; I must, indeed--is
it in the stable?"

"You shall see it in the morning, my darling--the very first thing,"
said Mrs. Aubrey, fervently kissing her beautiful little grandson, while
tears of joy and pride ran down her cheek. She then pressed her lips on
the delicate but flushed cheek of little Agnes, who was fast asleep; and
as soon as they had been conducted towards their nursery, Mrs. Aubrey,
followed by her children, led the way to the dining-room--the dear
delightful old dining-room, in which all of them had passed so many
happy hours of their lives. It was large and lofty; and two antique
branch silver candlesticks, standing on sconces upon each side of a
strange old straggling carved mantelpiece of inlaid oak, aided by the
blaze given out by two immense logs of wood burning beneath, thoroughly
illuminated it. The walls were oak-panelled, containing many pictures,
several of them of great value; and the floor also was of polished oak,
over the centre of which, however, was spread a thick richly-colored
Turkey carpet. Opposite the door was a large mullioned bay-window, then,
however, concealed behind an ample flowing crimson curtain. On the
farther side of the fireplace stood a high-backed and roomy armchair,
almost covered With Kate's embroidery, and in which Mrs. Aubrey had
evidently, as usual, been sitting till the moment of their arrival--for
on a small ebony table beside it lay her spectacles, and an open volume.
Nearly fronting the fireplace was a recess, in which stood an
exquisitely carved black ebony cabinet, inlaid with white and red ivory.
This, Miss Aubrey claimed as her own, and had appropriated it to her own
purposes ever since she was seven years old. "You dear old thing!" said
she, throwing open the folding-doors--"Everything just as I left it!
Really, dear mamma, I could skip about the room for joy! I wish Charles
would never leave Yatton again!"

"It's rather lonely, my love, when _none_ of you are with me," said Mrs.
Aubrey. "I feel getting older"----

"Dearest mamma," interrupted Miss Aubrey, quickly, and embracing her
mother, "_I_ won't leave you again! I'm quite tired of town--I am
indeed!"

Though fires were lit in their several dressing-rooms, of which they
were more than once reminded by their respective attendants, they all
remained seated before the fire in carriage costume, (except that Kate
had thrown aside her bonnet, her half-uncurled tresses hanging in
negligent profusion over her thickly-furred pelisse,) eagerly conversing
about the little incidents of their journey, and the events which had
transpired at Yatton since they had quitted it. At length, however, they
retired to perform the refreshing duties of the dressing-room, before
sitting down to supper. Of that comfortable meal, within twenty minutes'
time or so, they partook with a hearty relish. What mortal, however
delicate, could resist the fare set before them--the plump capon, the
delicious grilled ham, the poached eggs, the floury potatoes, home-baked
bread, white and brown--custards, mince-pies, home-brewed ale, as soft
as milk, as clear as amber--mulled claret--and so forth? The travellers
had evidently never relished anything more, to the infinite delight of
old Mrs. Aubrey; who observing, soon afterwards, irrepressible symptoms
of fatigue and drowsiness, ordered them all off to bed--Kate sleeping in
the same chamber in which she was sitting when the reader was permitted
to catch a moonlight glimpse of her.

They did not make their appearance the next morning till after nine
o'clock, Mrs. Aubrey having read prayers before the assembled servants,
as usual, nearly an hour before--a duty her son always performed when at
the Hall; but on this occasion he had overslept himself. He found his
mother in the breakfast-room, where she was soon joined by her daughter
and daughter-in-law, all of them being in high health and spirits. Just
as they were finishing breakfast, little Aubrey burst into the room in a
perfect ecstasy--for old Jones had taken him round to the stables, and
shown him the little pony which had been recently presented to him. He
had heard it neigh--had seen its long tail--had patted its neck--had
seen it eat--and now his vehement prayer was, that his papa, and mamma,
and Kate would immediately go and see it, and take his little sister
also.

Breakfast over, they separated. Old Mrs. Aubrey went to her own room to
be attended by her housekeeper; the other two ladies retired to their
rooms--Kate principally engaged in arranging her presents for her little
scholars: and Mr. Aubrey repaired to his library--as delightful an old
snuggery as the most studious recluse could desire--where he was
presently attended by his bailiff. He found that everything was going on
as he could have wished. With one or two exceptions, his rents were
paid most punctually; the farms and lands kept in capital condition. To
be sure an incorrigible old poacher had been giving a little trouble, as
usual, and stood committed for trial at the ensuing Spring Assizes; and
a few trivial trespasses had been committed in search of firewood, and
other small matters; which, after having been detailed with great
minuteness by his zealous and vigilant bailiff, were despatched by Mr.
Aubrey with a "pooh, pooh!"--Then there was Gregory, who held the
smallest farm on the estate, at its southern extremity--he was three
quarters' rent in arrear--but he had a sick wife and seven children--so
he was at once forgiven all that was due, and also what would become
due, on the ensuing quarter-day.--"In fact," said Mr. Aubrey, "don't ask
him for any more rent. I'm sure the poor fellow will pay when he's
able."

Some rents were to be raised; others lowered; and some half dozen of the
poorer cottages were to be forthwith put into good repair, at Mr.
Aubrey's expense. The two oxen had been sent, on the preceding
afternoon, from the home farm to the butcher's, to be distributed on
Christmas eve among the poorer villagers, according to orders brought
down from town by Sam the day before. Thus was Mr. Aubrey engaged for an
hour or two, till luncheon time, when good Dr. Tatham made his welcome
appearance, having been engaged most of the morning in touching up an
old Christmas sermon.

He had been vicar of Yatton for about thirty years, having been
presented to it by the late Mr. Aubrey, with whom he had been intimate
at college. He was a delightful specimen of a country parson. Cheerful,
unaffected, and good-natured, there was a dash of quaintness or
roughness about his manners, that reminded you of the crust in very fine
old port. He had been a widower, and childless, for fifteen years. His
parish had been ever since his family, whom he still watched over with
an affectionate vigilance. He was respected and beloved by all. Almost
every man, woman, and child that had died in Yatton, during nearly
thirty years, had departed with the sound of his kind and solemn voice
in their ears. He claimed a sort of personal acquaintance with almost
all the gravestones in his little churchyard; he knew the names of all
who slept beneath them; and when he looked at those gravestones, his
conscience bore him witness, that he had done his duty by the dust of
whom they spoke. He was at the bedside of a sick person almost as soon,
and as often, as the doctor--no matter what sort of weather, or at what
hour of the day or night. Methinks I see him now, bustling about the
village, with healthy ruddy cheek, a clear, cheerful eye, hair white as
snow! with a small stout figure, clothed in a suit of somewhat rusty
black, (knee-breeches and gaiters all round the year,) and with a small
shovel-hat. No one lives in the vicarage with him but an elderly woman,
his housekeeper, and her husband, whose chief business is to look after
the doctor's old mare and the little garden; in which I have often seen
him and his master, with his coat off, digging for an hour or two
together. He rises at five in the winter, and four in the summer, being
occupied till breakfast with his studies; for he was an excellent
scholar, and has not forgotten, in the zealous discharge of his sacred
duties, the pursuits of literature and philosophy, in which he had
gained no inconsiderable distinction in his youth. He derives a very
moderate income from his living; but it is even more than sufficient for
his necessities. Ever since Mr. Aubrey's devotion to politics has
carried him away from Yatton for a considerable portion of each year,
Dr. Tatham has been the right hand counsellor of old Mrs. Aubrey, in all
her pious and charitable plans and purposes. Every New-year's day, there
come from the Hall to the vicarage six dozen of fine old port wine--a
present from Mrs. Aubrey; but the little doctor (though he never tells
her so) scarce drinks six bottles of them in a year. Two dozen of them
go, within a few days' time, to a poor brother parson in an adjoining
parish, who, with his wife and three children--all in feeble health--can
hardly keep body and soul together, and who, but for this generous
brother, would not probably taste wine throughout the year, except on
certain occasions when the very humblest may moisten their poor lips
with wine--I mean the SACRAMENT--the sublime and solemn festival given
by One who doth not forget the poor and destitute, however in their
misery they may sometimes think to the contrary!--The remainder of his
little present Dr. Tatham distributes in small quantities among such of
his parishioners as may require it, and may not happen to have come
under the immediate notice of Mrs. Aubrey. Dr. Tatham has known Mr.
Aubrey ever since he was about five years old. 'Twas the doctor that
first taught him Greek and Latin; and, up to his going to college, gave
him the frequent advantage of his learned experience.--But surely I have
gone into a very long digression, and must return.

While Miss Aubrey, accompanied by her sister-in-law, and followed by a
servant carrying a great bag, filled with articles brought from London
the day before, went to the school which I have before mentioned, in
order to distribute her prizes and presents, Mr. Aubrey and Dr. Tatham
set off on a walk through the village.

"I must really do something for that old steeple of yours, Doctor," said
Mr. Aubrey, looking up, and shading his eyes with his hands, as, arm in
arm, they approached the church; "it looks crumbling away in many
parts!"

"If you'd only send a couple of masons to repair the _porch_, and make
it weather-tight, it would satisfy me for some years to come," said the
doctor, with exceeding earnestness.

"Well--we'll look at it," replied Aubrey; and, turning aside, they
entered the little churchyard.

"How I love this old yew-tree!" he exclaimed, as they passed under it;
"it casts a kind of tender gloom around that always makes me pensive,
not to say melancholy!" A sigh escaped him, as his eye glanced at the
family vault, which was almost in the centre of the shade, where lay his
father, three brothers, and a sister, and where, in the course of
nature, a few short years would see the precious remains of his mother
deposited. But the doctor who had hastened forward alone for a moment,
finding the church door open, called out to Mr. Aubrey, who soon stood
within the porch. It certainly required a little repairing, which Mr.
Aubrey said should be looked to immediately. "See--we're all preparing
for to-morrow," said Dr. Tatham, leading the way into the little church,
where the grizzle-headed clerk was busy decorating the old-fashioned
pulpit, reading-desk, and altar-piece, with the cheerful emblems of the
season.

"I never see these," said the doctor, taking up one of the sprigs of
mistletoe lying on a form beside them, "but I think of your own
Christmas verses, Mr. Aubrey, when you were younger and fresher than you
now are--don't you recollect them?"

"Oh--pooh!" quoth Aubrey, somewhat hastily.

"But I remember them," rejoined the doctor; and he began with great
emphasis and solemnity--

    "Hail! silvery, modest mistletoe,
    Wreath'd round winter's brow of snow,
    Clinging so chastely, tenderly:
    Hail holly, darkly, richly green,
    Whose crimson berries blush between
    Thy prickly foliage, modestly.
    Ye winter-flowers, bloom sweet and fair,
    Though Nature's garden else be bare--
    Ye vernal glistening emblems, meet
    To twine a Christmas coronet!"

"That will do, Doctor," interrupted Aubrey, smiling--"what a memory you
have for trifles!"

"Peggy! Peggy!--you're sadly overdoing it," said the doctor, hastily,
calling out to the sexton's wife, who was busy at work in the squire's
pew--a large square pew in the nave, near the pulpit. "Why, do you want
to hide the squire's family from the congregation? You're putting quite
a holly hedge all round!"

"Please you, sir," quoth Peggy, "I've got so much I don't know where to
put it--so, in course, I put it here!"

"Then," said the doctor, with a smile, looking round the church, "let
Jonas get up and stick some of it into those old hatchments; and,"
looking up at the clerk, busy at work in the pulpit, "don't you put
quite so much up there into my candlesticks!"

With this the parson and the squire took their departure. As they passed
slowly up the village, which already wore a sort of holiday aspect, they
met on all hands with a cordial, respectful, and affectionate greeting.
The quiet little public-house turned out some four or five stout steady
fellows--all tenants of Mr. Aubrey's--with their pipes in their hands,
and who took off their hats, and bowed very low. Mr. Aubrey went up and
entered into conversation with them for some minutes. Their families and
farms, he found, were well and thriving. There was quite a little crowd
of women about the shop of Nick Steele, the butcher, who, with an extra
hand to help him, was giving out the second ox which had been sent from
the Hall, to the persons whose names had been given in to him from Mrs.
Aubrey. Farther on, some were cleaning their little windows, others
sweeping their floors, and sprinkling sand over them; most were
displaying holly and mistletoe in their windows, and over their
mantelpieces. Everywhere, in short, was to be seen that air of quiet
preparation for the solemnly-cheerful morrow, which fills a thoughtful
English observer with feelings of pensive but exquisite satisfaction.

Mr. Aubrey returned home towards dusk, cheered and enlivened by his
walk. His sudden plunge into the simplicity and comparative solitude of
country life--and that country Yatton--had quite refreshed his feelings,
and given a tone to his spirits. Of course Dr. Tatham was to dine at the
Hall on the morrow; if he did not, indeed, it would have been for the
first time during the last five-and-twenty years!

Christmas eve passed pleasantly and quietly enough at the Hall. After
dinner the merry little ones were introduced, and their prattle and
romps occupied an hour right joyously. As soon as, smothered with
kisses, they had been dismissed to bed, old Mrs. Aubrey composed
herself, in her great chair, to her usual after-dinner's nap; while her
son, his wife, and sister, sitting fronting the fire--a decanter or two,
and a few wine-glasses and dessert, remaining on the table behind
them--sat conversing in a subdued tone, now listening to the wind
roaring in the chimney--a sound which not a little enhanced their sense
of comfort--then criticising the disposition of the evergreens with
which the room was plenteously decorated, and laying out their movements
during the ensuing fortnight. Mrs. Aubrey and Kate were, with
affectionate earnestness, contrasting to Aubrey the peaceful pleasures
of a country life with the restless excitement and endless anxieties of
a London political life, to which they saw him more and more addicting
himself; he all the while playfully parrying their attacks, but
secretly acknowledging the truth and force of what they said,
when--hark!--a novel sound from without, which roused the old lady from
her nap. What do you think, dear reader, it was? The voices of very
little girls singing what seemed to be a Christmas hymn: yes, they
caught the words--

    "Hark! the herald angels sing.
    Glory to the new-born king;
    Peace on earth and mercy mild"--

"Why, surely--it must be your little school-girls," said old Mrs.
Aubrey, looking at her daughter, and listening.

"I do believe it is!" quoth Kate, her eyes suddenly filling with tears,
as she sat eagerly inclining her ear towards the window.

"They must be standing on the grass-plot just before the window," said
Mr. Aubrey: the tiny voices were thrilling his very heart within him.
His sensitive nature might have been compared to a delicate Æolian harp
which gave forth, with the slightest breath of accident or
circumstance,--

    "The still, sad music of humanity."

In a few moments he was almost in tears--the sounds were so unlike the
fierce and turbulent cries of political warfare to which his ears had
been latterly accustomed! The more the poor children sang, the more was
he affected. Kate's tears fell fast, for she had been in an excited mood
before this little incident occurred. "Do you hear, mamma," said she,
"the voice of the poor little thing that was last taken into the school?
The little darling!" Kate tried to smile away her emotion; but 'twas in
vain. Mr. Aubrey gently drew aside the curtain, and pulled up the
central blind--and there, headed by their matron, stood the little
singers exposed to view, some eighteen in number, ranged in a row on the
grass, all in snug gray woollen hoods effectually protecting them from
the cold. The oldest seemed not more than ten or twelve years old, while
the younger ones could not be more than five or six. They seemed all
singing from their very hearts. Aubrey stood looking at them with very
deep interest.

As soon as they had finished their hymn, they were conducted into the
housekeeper's room, according to orders sent for that purpose, from Mrs.
Aubrey, and each of them received a little present of money, besides a
full glass of Mrs. Jackson's choicest raisin wine, and a currant bun;
Kate slipping half-a-guinea into the hand of their mistress, to whose
wish to afford gratification to the inmates of the Hall was entirely
owing the little incident which had so pleased and surprised them. "A
happy Christmas to you, dear papa and mamma!" said little Aubrey, about
eight o'clock the next morning, pushing aside the curtains, and trying
to clamber up on the high bed where Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey were still
asleep--soon, however, they were awakened by the dear welcome voice! The
morning promised a beautiful day. The air, though cold, was clear; and
the branches of the trees visible from their windows, were all covered
with hoar-frost, which seemed to line them as if with silver fringe. The
little bells of Yatton church were ringing a merry peal; but how
different in tone and strength from the clangor of the London
church-bells!--Christmas was indeed at last arrived--and cheerful were
the greetings of those who soon after met at the bountiful breakfast
table. Old Mrs. Aubrey was going to church with them--in fact, not even
a domestic who could be possibly spared, was to be left at home. By the
time that the carriage, with the fat and lazy-looking gray horses, was
at the Hall door, the sun had burst out in beauty from an almost
cloudless sky. The three ladies rode alone; Aubrey preferring to walk,
accompanied by his little son, as the ground was dry and hard, and the
distance very short. A troop of some twelve or fourteen servants, male
and female, presently followed; and then came Mr. Aubrey, leading along
the heir of Yatton--a boy of whom he might well be proud, as the future
possessor of his name, his fortune, and his honors. When he had reached
the church, the carriage was returning home. Almost the whole
congregation stood collected before the church door, to see the squire's
family enter; and reverent were the courtesies and bows with which old
Mrs. Aubrey and her lovely companions were received. Very soon after
they had taken their places, Mr. Aubrey and his son made their
appearance; objects they were of the deepest interest, as they passed
along to their pew. A few minutes afterwards little Dr. Tatham entered
the church in his surplice, (which he almost always put on at home,)
with a face, composed and serious to be sure, but yet overspread with an
expression even more bland and benignant than usual. He knew there was
not a soul among the little crowd around him that did not really love
him, and that did not know how heartily he returned their love. All eyes
were of course on the squire's pew. Mrs. Aubrey was looking well--her
daughter and daughter-in-law were thought by all to be by far the most
beautiful women in the world--what must people think of them in London?
Mr. Aubrey looked, they thought, pleased and happy, but rather paler,
and even a little thinner; and as for the "_little_ squire," with his
bright eyes, his rosy cheeks, his arch smile, his curling auburn
hair--and so like his father and mother--he was the pride of Yatton!

Dr. Tatham read prayers, as he always did; with great distinctness and
deliberation, so that everybody in the church, young and old, could
catch every syllable; and he preached, considerately enough, a very
short sermon--pithy, homely, and affectionate. He reminded them that he
was then preaching his thirty-first Christmas-day sermon from that
pulpit! The service and the sacrament over, none of the congregation
moved from their places till the occupants of the squire's pew had
quitted it; but as soon as they had got outside of the door, the good
people poured out after them, and almost lined the way from the church
door to the gate at which the carriage stood, receiving and answering a
hundred kind inquiries concerning themselves, their families, and their
circumstances.

Mr. Aubrey stayed behind, desirous of taking another little ramble with
Dr. Tatham through the village, for the day was indeed bright and
beautiful, and the occasion inspiriting. There was not a villager within
four or five miles of the Hall who did not sit down that day to a
comfortable little relishing dinner, at least one-third of them being
indebted for it directly to the bounty of the Aubreys. As soon as Dr.
Tatham had taken off his gown, he accompanied Mr. Aubrey in cheerful
mood, in the briskest spirits. 'T was delightful to see the smoke come
curling out of every chimney, while few folk were visible out of doors;
whence you reasonably concluded that they were all housed, and preparing
for, or partaking of, their roast-beef and plum-pudding! Now and then
the bustling wife would show her heated red face at the door, and
hastily courtesy as they passed, then returning to dish up her little
dinner.

"Ah, ha; Mr. Aubrey!--isn't such a day as this worth a whole year in
town?" exclaimed Dr. Tatham.

"Both have their peculiar advantages, Doctor; the pleasure of the
contrast would be lost if"----

"Contrast! Believe me, in the language of the poet Virgil"----

"Ah! how goes on old blind Bess, Doctor?" interrupted Aubrey, as they
approached the smallest cottage in the village--in fact the very last.

"She's just the same as she has been these last twenty years. Shall we
look in on the old creature?"

"With all my heart. I hope, poor soul! that _she_ has not been
overlooked on this festive occasion."

"Trust Mrs. Aubrey for that! I'll answer for it, we shall find old Bess
as happy, in her way, as she can be."

This was a stone blind old woman, who had been bedridden for the last
twenty years. She had certainly passed her hundredth year--some said two
or three years before--and had lived in her present little cottage for
nearly half a century, having grown out of the recollection of almost
all the inhabitants of the village. She had long been a pensioner of
Mrs. Aubrey's, by whom alone, indeed, she was supported. Her great age,
her singular appearance, and a certain rambling way of talking that she
had, had long earned her the reputation, in the village, of being able
to say strange things; and one or two of the old gossips knew of things
coming to pass according to what--poor old soul--she had predicted!

Dr. Tatham gently pushed open the door. The cottage consisted, in fact,
of but one room, and that a very small one, and lit by only one little
window. The floor was clean, and evidently just fresh sanded. On a
wooden stool, opposite a fireplace, on which a small saucepan was
placed, sat a girl about twelve years old, (a daughter of the woman who
lived nearest,) crumbling some bread into a basin, with some broth in
it. On a narrow bed against the wall, opposite the window, was to be
seen the somewhat remarkable figure of the solitary old tenant of the
cottage. She was sitting up, resting against the pillow, which was
placed on end against the wall. She was evidently a very tall woman;
and her long, brown, wrinkled, shrivelled face, with prominent
cheekbones and bushy white eyebrows, betokened the possession, in
earlier days, of a most masculine expression of features. Her hair,
white as snow, was gathered back from her forehead, under a spreading
plain white cap; and her sightless eyes, wide open, stared forward with
a startling and somewhat sinister expression. She was wrapped round in a
clean white bedgown; and her long thin arms lay straight before her on
the outside of the bedclothes. Her lips were moving, as if she were
talking to herself.

"She's a strange-looking object, indeed!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, as he
and Dr. Tatham stood watching her for a few moments in silence.

"Dame! dame!" said the doctor, loudly, approaching her bedside, "how are
you to-day? It's Christmas-day--I wish you a merry Christmas."

"Ay, ay--merry, merry!" echoed the old woman, with a half-groan. "More
the merrier! I've seen a hundred and nine of them!"

"You seem comfortable enough, dame," said Mr. Aubrey, kindly. "I hope
you _are_?"

"They won't give me my broth--my broth," said she, peevishly.

"It's coming, granny," called out the shrill voice of the girl sitting
before the fire, quickening her motions.

"Here's the squire come to see you, dame, and he wishes you a happy
Christmas," said Dr. Tatham, loudly.

"What! the squire? Alive yet? Ah, well-a-day! well-a-day!" said she, in
a feeble, mournful tone, slowly rubbing together her long, skinny,
wrinkled hands, on the backs of which the veins stood out like knotted
whipcord. She repeated the last words several times, in a truly doleful
tone, gently shaking her head.

"Granny's been very sad, sir, to-day, and cried two or three times,"
said the little girl, stirring about the hot broth.

"Poor squire! doth he not look sad?" inquired the old woman.

"Why should I, dame? What have I to fear?" said Mr. Aubrey, somewhat
quickly.

"Merry in the Hall! all, merry! merry! But no one has heard it except
old blind Bess. Where's the squire?" she added, suddenly turning full
towards the spot where they were standing--and her face seemed whitened
with emotion. Her staring eyes were settled on Mr. Aubrey's face, as if
she saw him distinctly, and were reading his very soul.

"Here I am, dame," said he, with a great deal of curiosity, to say the
least of it.

"Give me your hand, Squire," said she, stretching out her left arm, and
working about her talon-like fingers, as if in eagerness to grasp Mr.
Aubrey's hand, which he gave her.

"Never fear! never, never! Happy in the Hall! I see all! How long"----

"Why, dame, this is truly a very pleasant greeting of yours," interposed
Dr. Tatham, with a smile.

"Short and bitter! long and sweet! Put your trust in God, Squire."

"I hope I do, granny," replied Mr. Aubrey, seriously.

"I see! I hear!--my broth! my broth!--where is it?"

"Here it is, granny," said the girl--"It's all ready!"

"Good-day, dame," said Mr. Aubrey, gently disengaging his hand from
hers; and before they had left the cottage, she began to swallow very
greedily the broth with which the little girl fed her.

"This is the sort of way in which this old superannuated creature has
frightened one or two of"----

"Is it indeed?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, with a sort of mechanical smile.
Dr. Tatham saw that he was in a somewhat serious humor.

"She's alarmed _you_, I protest!--I protest she has!" exclaimed the
doctor, with a slight laugh, as they walked along. Now, he knew the
disposition and character of Aubrey intimately; and was well aware of a
certain tendency which he had to superstition.

"My dear doctor, I assure you that you are mistaken--I am indeed not
_alarmed_--but at the same time I will tell you something not a little
singular. Would you believe that a month or two ago, when in town, I
dreamed that I heard some one uttering something very much like the
words which we have just heard from this old woman?"

"Ah! ha, ha!" laughed the doctor; and, after a second or two's pause,
Aubrey, as if ashamed of what he had said, echoed the laugh, and their
conversation passed on to political topics, which kept them engaged for
the remainder of their walk, Mr. Aubrey quitting his companion at the
door of the vicarage, to be rejoined by him at five o'clock, the dinner
hour at the Hall. As Mr. Aubrey walked along the park, the shades of
evening casting a deepening gloom around him, his thoughts involuntarily
recurred to the cottage of old blind Bess, and he felt vague
apprehensions flitting with darkening shade across his mind. Though he
was hardly weak enough to attach any definite meaning or importance to
the gibberish he had heard, it still had left an unpleasant
_impression_, and he was vexed at feeling a wish that the
incident--trifling as he was willing to believe it--should not be
mentioned by Dr. Tatham at the Hall; and still more was he excited when
he recollected that he had _purposely abstained_ from requesting the
good doctor not to do so. All this undoubtedly implied that the matter
had occupied Mr. Aubrey's thoughts to a greater extent than he secretly
relished. On reaching, however, the Hall door, this brief pressure on
his feelings quickly ceased; for on entering, he saw Mrs. Aubrey, his
sister, and his two children, at high romps together in the hall, and he
heartily joined in them.




CHAPTER VIII.


By five o'clock the little party were seated at the cheerful
dinner-table, glistening with the old family plate and that kind of
fare, at once substantial and luxurious, which befitted the occasion.
Old Mrs. Aubrey, in her simple white turban and black velvet dress,
presided with a kind of dignified cheerfulness which was delightful to
see. Kate had contrived to make herself look more lovely even than
usual, wearing a dress of dark blue satin, tastefully trimmed with
blonde, and which exquisitely comported with her beautiful complexion.
Oh that Delamere had been sitting opposite to, or beside her! The more
matured proportions of her blooming sister-in-law appeared to infinite
advantage in a rich green velvet dress, while a superb diamond glistened
with subdued lustre in her beautiful bosom. She wore no ornaments in her
dark hair, which was, as indeed might be said of Kate, "when unadorned,
adorned the most." The gray-headed old butler, (as brisk as his choicest
champagne,) and the two steady-looking old family servants, going about
their business with quiet celerity--the delicious air of antique
elegance around them--the sense of profound seclusion--of remoteness
from the exciting hubbub of the world--in every respect this was a
Christmas dinner after one's own heart! Oh the merry and dear old
Yatton! And as if there were not loveliness enough already in the room,
behold the door suddenly pushed open, as soon as the dessert is arrayed
on the table, and run up to his gay and laughing mother, her little son,
his ample snowy collar resting gracefully on his crimson velvet dress.
'Tis her hope and pride--her first-born--the little squire; but where is
his sister?--where is Agnes? 'Tis even as Charles says--she fell asleep
in the very act of being dressed, and they were obliged to put her to
bed; so Charles is alone in his glory. You may well fold your delicate
white arm around him, mamma!--

His little gold cup is nearly filled to join in the first toast: are you
all--dear little circle!--are you all ready? The worthy doctor has
poured old Mrs. Aubrey's, and young Mrs. Aubrey's, and Kate's glass full
up to the brim:--"_Our next Christmas!_" quoth he, cheerily elevating
his glass.

Yes, your next Christmas! The vigilant eye of Dr. Tatham alone perceived
a faint change of color in Mr. Aubrey's cheek as the words were uttered;
and his eye wandered for an instant, as if tracing across the room the
image of old blind Bess; but 'twas gone in a moment; Aubrey was soon in
much higher spirits than usual. Well he might be. How could man be
placed in happier circumstances than he was? As soon as the three ladies
had withdrawn, together with little Aubrey, the doctor and Mr. Aubrey
drew their chairs before the fire, and enjoyed a long hour's pleasant
conversation, on matters domestic and political. As to the latter, the
doctor and the squire were stout Tories; and a speech which Aubrey had
lately delivered in the House, on the Catholic claims, had raised him to
a pitch of eminence in the doctor's estimation, where Aubrey had very
few men in the country to keep him company. The doctor here got on very
fast indeed; and was just assuring the squire that he saw dark days in
store for Old England from the machinations of the Papists; and that,
for his part, he should rejoice to "seal his testimony with his blood,"
and would go to the stake not only without flinching, but
rejoicing--(all which I verily believe _he_ verily believed he would
have done) and coveting the crown of martyrdom--when Aubrey caught the
sound of his sister playing on the organ, a noble instrument, which a
year or two before, at her urgent request, he had purchased and placed
in the drawing-room, whither he and the doctor at once repaired. 'Twas a
spacious and lofty room, well calculated for the splendid instrument
which occupied the large recess fronting the door. Miss Aubrey was
playing Handel, and with an exquisite perception of his matchless power
and beauty. Hark! did you ever hear the grand yet simple recitative she
is now commencing?

     "_In the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from
     the East to Jerusalem,_

     "_Saying--Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have
     seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him._"

The doctor officiated as chaplain that evening. The room was almost
filled with servants, many of whose looks very plainly showed the merry
doings which must have been going on in the servants' hall. Some could
scarce keep their eyes open; one or two sat winking at each other! and
others were fairly asleep, and snoring! Under the circumstances,
therefore, the doctor, with much judgment, read very short prayers, and
immediately afterwards took his departure for his snug little vicarage.
The moon shone brightly, the air was clear and bracing, and he felt as
blithe as a bird as he walked homeward!

The next morning, which proved as fine as the preceding, Mr. Aubrey was
detained in-doors with his letters, and one or two other little matters
of business in his library, till luncheon time. "What say you, Kate, to
a ride round the country?" said he, on taking his seat. Kate was
delighted; and forthwith the horses were ordered to be got ready as soon
as possible.

"You must not mind a little rough riding, Kate, by the way," said
Aubrey; "for we shall have to get over some ugly places!--I'm going to
meet Waters at the end of the avenue, about that old sycamore--we must
have it down at last."

"Oh no, Charles, no; I thought we had settled that last year!" replied
Kate, earnestly.

"Pho! if it had not been for you, Kate, it would have been down two
years ago at least. Its hour is come at last; 'tis indeed, so no
pouting! It is injuring the other trees; and, besides, it spoils the
prospect from the left wing of the house."

"'Tis only Waters that puts all these things into your head, Charles,
and I shall let him know _my_ opinion on the subject when I see him!
Mamma, haven't _you_ a word to say for the old"----

But Mr. Aubrey, not deeming it discreet to await the new force which was
being brought against him, started off to inspect a newly purchased
horse, just brought to the stables.

Kate, who really became everything, looked charming in her blue
riding-habit and hat, sitting on her horse with infinite ease and grace;
in fact, a capital horsewoman. The exercise soon brought a rich bloom
upon her cheek; and as she cantered along the road by the side of her
brother, no one could have met them without being almost startled at her
beauty. Just as they had dropped into an easy walk--

"Charles," said she, observing two horsemen approaching them, "who can
these be? Heavens! did you ever see such figures? And how they ride!"

"Why, certainly," replied her brother, smiling, "they look a brace of
arrant Cockneys! Ah, ha!--what can they be doing in _these_ parts?"

"Dear me, what puppies!" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, lowering her voice as
they neared the persons she spoke of.

"They _are_ certainly a most extraordinary couple! Who _can_ they be?"
said Mr. Aubrey, a smile forcing itself into his features. One of the
gentlemen thus referred to, was dressed in a light blue surtout, with
the tip of a white pocket-handkerchief seen peeping out of a pocket in
the front of it. His hat, with scarce any brim to it, was stuck aslant
on the top of a bushy head of queer-colored hair. His shirt-collar was
turned down completely over his stock, displaying a great quantity of
dirt-colored hair under his chin; while a pair of mustaches, of the same
color, were sprouting upon his upper lip, and a perpendicular tuft
depended from his under lip. A quizzing-glass was stuck in his right
eye, and in his hand he carried a whip with a shining silver head. The
other was almost equally distinguished by the elegance of his
appearance. He had a glossy hat, a purple-colored velvet waistcoat, two
pins connected by little chains in his stock, a bottle-green surtout,
sky-blue trousers, and a most splendid riding-whip. In short, who should
these be but our old friends, Messrs. Titmouse and Snap? Whoever they
might be--and whatever their other accomplishments, it was plain that
they were perfect novices on horseback; and their horses had every
appearance of having been much fretted and worried by their riders. To
the surprise of Mr. Aubrey and his sister, these two personages
attempted to rein in as they neared, and evidently intended to speak to
them.

"Pray--a--sir, will you, sir, tell us," commenced Titmouse, with a
desperate attempt to appear at his ease, as he tried to make his horse
stand still for a moment--"isn't there a place called--called"--here his
horse, whose sides were constantly being galled by the spurs of its
unconscious rider, began to back a little; then to go on one side, and,
in Titmouse's fright, his glass dropped from his eye, and he seized hold
of the pommel. Nevertheless, to show the lady how completely he was at
his ease all the while, he levelled a great many oaths and curses at the
unfortunate eyes and soul of his wayward brute; who, however, not in the
least moved by them, but infinitely disliking the spurs of its rider and
the twisting round of its mouth by the reins, seemed more and more
inclined for mischief, and backed close up to the edge of the ditch.

"I'm afraid, sir," said Mr. Aubrey, kindly and very earnestly, "you are
not much accustomed to riding. Will you permit _me_"----

"Oh, yes--ye--ye--s, sir, I _am_ though,--uncommon--whee-o-uy!
whuoy!"--(then a fresh volley of oaths.) "Oh, dear, 'pon my soul--ho! my
eyes!--what--what _is_ he going to do! Snap! Snap!"--'T was, however,
quite in vain to call on _that_ gentleman for assistance; for he had
grown as pale as death, on finding that his own brute seemed strongly
disposed to follow the infernal example (or rather, as it were, the
_converse_ of it) of the other, and was particularly inclined to rear up
on its hind-legs. The very first motion of that sort brought Snap's
heart (not large enough, perhaps, to choke him) into his mouth.
Titmouse's beast, in the mean while, suddenly wheeled round; and
throwing its hind feet into the air, sent its terrified rider flying
head over heels into the very middle of the hedge, from which he dropped
into the soft wet ditch on the road-side. Both Mr. Aubrey and his groom
immediately dismounted, and secured the horse, who, having got rid of
its ridiculous rider, stood perfectly quiet. Titmouse proved to be more
frightened than hurt. His hat was crushed flat on his head, and half the
left side of his face covered with mud--as, indeed, were his clothes all
the way down. The groom (almost splitting with laughter) helped him on
his horse again; and as Mr. and Miss Aubrey were setting off--"I think,
sir," said the former, politely, "you were inquiring for some place?"

"Yes, sir," quoth Snap. "Isn't there a place called Ya--Yat--Yat--(be
quiet, you brute!)--Yatton about here?"

"Yes, sir--straight on," replied Mr. Aubrey. Miss Aubrey hastily threw
her veil over her face, to conceal her laughter, urging on her horse;
and she and her brother were soon out of sight of the strangers.

"I say, Snap," quoth Titmouse, when he had in a measure cleansed
himself, and they had both got a little composed, "see that lovely gal?"

"Fine gal--devilish fine!" replied Snap.

"I'm blessed if I don't think--'pon my life, I believe we've met
before!"

"Didn't seem to know you though!"---- quoth Snap, somewhat dryly.

"Ah! you don't know--How uncommon infernal unfortunate to happen just at
the moment when"---- Titmouse became silent; for all of a sudden he
recollected when and where, and under what circumstances he had seen
Miss Aubrey before, and which his vanity would not allow of his telling
Snap. The fact was, that she had once accompanied her sister-in-law to
Messrs. Tag-rag and Company's, to purchase some small matter of mercery.
Titmouse had served them; and his absurdity of manner and personal
appearance had provoked a smile, which Titmouse a little misconstrued;
for when, a Sunday or two afterwards, he met her in the Park, the little
fool actually had the presumption to nod to her--she having not the
slightest notion who the little wretch might be--and of course not
having, on the present occasion, the least recollection of him. The
reader will recollect that this incident made a deep impression on the
mind of Mr. Titmouse.

The coincidence was really not a little singular--but to return to Mr.
Aubrey and his sister. After riding a mile or two farther up the road,
they leaped over a very low mound or fence, which formed the extreme
boundary of that part of the estate, and having passed through a couple
of fields, they entered the eastern extremity of that fine avenue of
elms, at the higher end of which stood Kate's favorite tree, and also
Waters and his under-bailiff--who looked to her like a couple of
executioners, only awaiting the fiat of her brother. The sun shone
brightly upon the doomed sycamore--"the axe was laid at its root." As
they rode up the avenue, Kate begged very hard for mercy; but for once
her brother seemed obdurate--the tree, he said, _must_ come down--'t was
all nonsense to think of leaving it standing any longer!--

"Remember, Charles," said she, passionately, as they drew up, "how we've
all of us romped and sported under it! Poor papa also"----

"See, Kate, how rotten it is," said her brother; and riding close to it,
with his whip he snapped off two or three of its feeble silvery-gray
branches--"it's high time for it to come down."

"It fills the grass all round with little branches, sir, whenever
there's the least breath of wind," said Waters.

"It won't hardly hold a crow's weight on the topmost branches, sir,"
added Dickons, the under-bailiff, very modestly.

"Had it any leaves last summer?" inquired Mr. Aubrey.

"I don't think, sir," replied Waters, "it had a hundred all over it!"

"Really, Kate," said her brother, "'t is such a melancholy, unsightly
object, when seen from any part of the Hall"--turning round on his horse
to look at the rear of the Hall, which was at about two hundred yards'
distance. "It looks such an old withered thing among the fresh green
trees around it--'t is quite a painful contrast." Kate had gently urged
on her horse while her brother was speaking, till she was close beside
him. "Charles," said she, in a low whisper, "does not it remind you a
little of poor old mamma, with her gray hairs, among her children and
grandchildren? _She_ is not out of place among us--is she?" Her eyes
filled with tears. So did her brother's.

"Dearest Kate," said he, with emotion, affectionately grasping her
little hand, "you have triumphed! The old tree shall never be cut down
in my time! Waters, let the tree stand; and if anything _is_ to be done
to it--let the greatest possible _care_ be taken of it." Miss Aubrey
turned her head aside to conceal her emotion. Had they been alone, she
would have flung her arms round her brother's neck.

"If I were to speak my mind, sir," said the compliant Waters, seeing the
turn things were taking, "I should say, with our young lady, the old
tree's quite a kind of ornament in this here situation, and (as one
might say) it sets off the rest." [It was he who had been worrying Mr.
Aubrey for these last three years to have it cut down!]

"Well," replied Mr. Aubrey, "however that may be, let me hear no more of
cutting it down--Ah! what does old Jolter want here?" said he, observing
an old tenant of that name, almost bent double with age, hobbling
towards them. He was wrapped up in a coarse thick blue coat; his hair
was long and white; his eyes dim and glassy with age.

"I don't know, sir--I'll go and see," said Waters.

"What's the matter, Jolter?" he inquired, stepping forward to meet him.

"Nothing much, sir," replied the old man, feebly, and panting, taking
off his hat, and bowing very low towards Mr. and Miss Aubrey.

"Put your hat on, my old friend," said Mr. Aubrey, kindly.

"I only come to bring you this bit of paper, sir, if you please," said
the old man, addressing Waters. "You said, a while ago, as how I was
always to bring you papers that were left with me; and this"--taking one
out of his pocket--"was left with me only about an hour ago. It's
seemingly a lawyer's paper, and was left by an uncommon gay young chap.
He asked me my name, and then he looked at the paper, and read it all
over to me, but I couldn't make anything of it."

"What is it?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, as Waters cast his eye over a sheet
of paper, partly printed and partly written.

"Why, it seems the old story, sir--that slip of waste land, sir. Mr.
Tomkins is at it again, sir."

"Well, if he chooses to spend his money in that way, I can't help it,"
said Mr. Aubrey, with a smile. "Let me look at the paper." He did so.
"Yes, it seems the same kind of thing as before. Well," handing it back,
"send it to Mr. Parkinson, and tell him to look to it; and, at all
events, take care that poor old Jolter comes to no trouble by the
business. How's the old wife, Jacob?"

"She's dreadful bad with rheumatis, sir; but the stuff that Madam sends
her does her a woundy deal of good, sir, in her inside."

"Well, we must try if we can't send you some more; and, harkee, if the
goodwife doesn't get better soon, send us up word to the Hall, and we'll
have the doctor call on her. Now, Kate, let us away homeward." And they
were soon out of sight.

I do not intend to deal so unceremoniously or summarily as Mr. Aubrey
did, with the document which had been brought to his notice by Jolter,
then handed over to Waters, and by him, according to orders, transmitted
the next day to Mr. Parkinson, Mr. Aubrey's attorney. It was what is
called a "DECLARATION IN EJECTMENT;" touching which, in order to throw a
ray or two of light upon a document which will make no small figure in
this history, I shall try to give the reader a little information on the
point; and hope that a little attention to what now follows, will be
repaid in due time. Here beginneth a little lecture on law.

If _Jones_ claim a _debt_, or _goods_, or _damages_, from _Smith_, one
should think that, if he went to law, the action would be entitled
"Jones _versus_ Smith;" and so it is. But behold, if it be LAND which is
claimed by Jones from Smith, the style and name of the cause stand
thus:--"DOE, on the demise of Jones, _versus_ ROE." Instead, therefore,
of Jones and Smith fighting out the matter in their own proper names,
they set up a couple of puppets, (called "John Doe" and "Richard Roe,")
who fall upon one another in a very quaint fashion, after the manner of
Punch and Judy. John Doe pretends to be the real plaintiff, and Richard
Roe the real defendant. John Doe says that the land which Richard Roe
has, is his, (the said John Doe's,) because _Jones_ (the real plaintiff)
gave him a lease of it; and _Jones_ is then called "the lessor of the
plaintiff." John Doe further says that one Richard Roe, (who calls
himself by the very significant and expressive name of a "_Casual
Ejector_,") came and turned him out, and so John Doe brings his action
against Richard Roe. 'Tis a fact, that whenever land is sought to be
recovered in England, this anomalous and farcical proceeding must be
adopted.[15] It is the duty of the _real_ plaintiff (Jones) to serve on
the _real_ defendant (Smith) a copy of the queer document which I shall
proceed to lay before the reader; and also to append to it an
affectionate note, intimating the serious consequences which will ensue
upon inattention or contumacy. The "Declaration," then, which had been
served upon old Jolter, was in the words, letters, and figures
following--that is to say:--

     "IN THE KING'S BENCH.
                                 "Michaelmas Term, the---- of King----.

     "YORKSHIRE, to-wit--Richard Roe was attached to answer John Doe of
     a plea wherefore the said Richard Roe, with force and arms, &c.,
     entered into two messuages, two dwelling-houses, two cottages, two
     stables, two out-houses, two yards, two gardens, two orchards,
     twenty acres of land covered with water, twenty acres of arable
     land, twenty acres of pasture land, and twenty acres of other land,
     with the appurtenances, situated in _Yatton_, in the county of
     York, which TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, Esquire, had demised to the said
     John Doe for a term which is not yet expired, and ejected him from
     his said farm, and other wrongs to the said John Doe there did, to
     the great damage of the said John Doe, and against the peace of our
     Lord the King, &c.; and Thereupon the said John Doe, by OILY
     GAMMON, his attorney, complains,--

     "That whereas the said TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, on the --th day of
     August, in the year of our Lord 18--, at Yatton aforesaid, in the
     county aforesaid, had demised the same tenements, with the
     appurtenances, to the said John Doe, to have and to hold the same
     to the said John Doe and his assigns thenceforth, for and during,
     and unto the full end and term of twenty years thence next ensuing,
     and fully to be completed and ended: By virtue of which said
     demise, the said John Doe entered into the said tenements, with the
     appurtenances, and became and was thereof possessed for the said
     term, so to him thereof granted as aforesaid. And the said John Doe
     being so thereof possessed, the said Richard Roe afterwards,
     to-wit, on the day and year aforesaid, at the parish aforesaid, in
     the county aforesaid, with force and arms, that is to say with
     swords, staves, and knives, &c., entered into the said tenements,
     with the appurtenances, which the said TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE had
     demised to the said John Doe in manner and for the term aforesaid,
     which is not yet expired, and ejected the said John Doe out of his
     said farm; and other wrongs to the said John Doe then and there
     did, to the great damage of the said John Doe, and against the
     peace of our said Lord the now King. Wherefore the said John Doe
     saith that he is injured, and hath sustained damage to the value of
     £50, and therefore he brings his suit, &c.

     "SQUEAL, for the Plaintiff.  { Pledges of   } John Den.
     GROWL, for the Defendant.    { Prosecution. } Richard Fenn.

     "MR. JACOB JOLTER,

     "I am informed that you are in possession of, or claim title to,
     the premises in this Declaration of Ejectment mentioned, or to some
     part thereof: And I, being sued in this action as a _casual
     ejector_ only, and having no claim or title to the same, do advise
     you to appear, next Hilary term, in His Majesty's Court of King's
     Bench at Westminster, by some attorney of that Court; and then and
     there, by a rule to be made of the same Court, to cause yourself to
     be made defendant in my stead; otherwise, I shall suffer judgment
     to be entered against me by default, and you will be turned out of
     possession.

                           "Your loving friend,
                                                           RICHARD ROE.
     "Dated this 8th day of December 18--."[16]

You may regard the above document in the light of a deadly and
destructive missile, thrown by an unperceived enemy into a peaceful
citadel; attracting no particular notice from the innocent unsuspecting
inhabitants--among whom, nevertheless, it presently explodes, and all is
terror, death, and ruin.

Mr. Parkinson, Mr. Aubrey's solicitor, who resided at Grilston, the
post-town nearest to Yatton, from which it was distant about six or
seven miles, was sitting on the evening of Tuesday the 28th December
18--, in his office, nearly finishing a letter to his London agents,
Messrs. Runnington and Company--one of the most eminent firms in the
profession--and which he was desirous of despatching by that night's
mail. Among other papers which have come into my hands in connection
with this history, I have happened to light on the letter which he was
writing; and as it is not long, and affords a specimen of the way in
which business is carried on between town and country attorneys and
solicitors, here followeth a copy of it:--

                                                "Grilston, 28th Dec. 18--.

     "DEAR SIRS,

                              "_Re Middleton_.

     "Have you got the marriage-settlements between these parties ready?
     If so, please send them as soon as possible; for both the lady's
     and gentleman's friends are (as usual in such cases) very pressing
     for them.

                          "_Puddinghead_ v. _Quickwit_.

     "Plaintiff bought a horse of defendant in November last, 'warranted
     sound,' and paid for it on the spot £64. A week afterwards, his
     attention was accidentally drawn to the animal's head; and to his
     infinite surprise, he discovered that the left eye was a _glass
     eye_, so closely resembling the other in color, that the difference
     could not be discovered except on a very close examination. I have
     seen it myself, and it is indeed wonderfully well done. My
     countrymen are certainly pretty sharp hands in such matters--but
     this beats everything I ever heard of. Surely this is a breach of
     the warranty? Or is it to be considered a _patent_ defect, which
     would not be within the warranty?[17]--Please take pleader's
     opinion, and particularly as to whether the horse could be brought
     into court to be viewed by the court and jury, which would have a
     great effect. If your pleader thinks the action will lie, let him
     draw declaration, _venue_--Lancashire (for my client would have no
     chance with a Yorkshire jury,) if you think the _venue_ is
     transitory, and that defendant would not be successful on a motion
     to change it. _Qu._--Is the man who sold the horse to defendant a
     _competent[18] witness_ for the plaintiff, to prove that, when he
     sold it to defendant, it had but one eye, and that on this account
     the horse was sold for less?

                        "_Mule_ v. _Stott_.

     "I cannot get these parties to come to an amicable settlement. You
     may remember, from the two former actions, that it is for damages
     on account of two geese of defendant having been found trespassing
     on a few yards of a field belonging to the plaintiff. Defendant now
     contends that he is entitled to common, _pour cause de vicinage_.
     _Qu._--Can this be shown under Not Guilty, or must it be pleaded
     specially?--About two years ago, by the way, a pig belonging to
     plaintiff got into defendant's flower-garden, and did at least £3
     worth of damage--Can this be in any way set off against the present
     action? There is no hope of avoiding a third trial, as the parties
     are now more exasperated against each other than ever, and the
     expense (as at least fifteen witnesses will be called on each side)
     will amount to upwards of £250. You had better retain Mr.
     Cacklegander.

                    "_Re Lords Oldacre and De la Zouch._

     "Are the deeds herein engrossed? As it is a matter of magnitude,
     and the foundation of extensive and permanent family arrangements,
     pray let the greatest care be taken to secure accuracy. Please take
     special care of the stamps"----

Thus far had the worthy writer proceeded with his letter, when Waters
made his appearance, delivering to him the declaration in ejectment
which had been served upon old Jolter, and also the instructions
concerning it which had been given by Mr. Aubrey. After Mr. Parkinson
had asked particularly concerning Mr. Aubrey's health, and what had
brought him so suddenly to Yatton, he cast his eye hastily over the
"Declaration"--and at once and contemptuously came to the same
conclusion concerning it which had been arrived at by Waters and Mr.
Aubrey, viz. that it was another little arrow out of the quiver of the
litigious Mr. Tomkins. As soon as Waters had left, Mr. Parkinson thus
proceeded to conclude his letter:--

                    "_Doe dem. Titmouse_ v. _Roe_.

     "I enclose you Declaration herein, served yesterday. No doubt it is
     the disputed slip of waste land adjoining the cottage of old Jacob
     Jolter, a tenant of Mr. Aubrey of Yatton, that is sought to be
     recovered. I am quite sick of this petty annoyance, as also is Mr.
     Aubrey, who is now down here. Please call on Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
     and Snap, of Saffron Hill, and settle the matter finally, on the
     best terms you can; it being Mr. Aubrey's wish that old Jolter (who
     is very feeble and timid) should suffer no inconvenience. I observe
     a new lessor of the plaintiff, with a very singular name. I suppose
     it is the name of some prior holder of the acre or two of property
     at present held by Mr. Tomkins.

     "Hoping soon to hear from you, (particularly about the
     marriage-settlement,) I am,

                               "Dear Sirs,
                "(With all the compliments of the season,)
                              "Yours truly,
                                                      "JAMES PARKINSON.
     "MESSRS. RUNNINGTON & CO.

     "P. S.--The oysters and codfish came to hand in excellent order,
     for which please accept my best thanks.

     "I shall remit you in a day or two £100 on account."

This letter, lying among some twenty or thirty similar ones on Mr.
Runnington's table, on the morning of its arrival in town, was opened in
its turn; and then, in like manner, with most of the others, handed over
to the managing clerk, in order that he might inquire into and report
upon the state of the various matters of business referred to. As to the
last item (_Doe dem. Titmouse_ v. _Roe_) in Mr. Parkinson's letter,
there seemed no particular reason for hurrying; so two or three days had
elapsed before Mr. Runnington, having some little casual business to
transact with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, bethought himself of
looking at his Diary, to see if there were not something else that he
had to do with that very sharp "house." Putting, therefore, the
Declaration in _Doe d. Titmouse_ v. _Roe_ into his pocket, it was not
long before he was to be seen at the office in Saffron Hill--and in the
very room in it which had been the scene of several memorable interviews
between Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse and Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. I
shall not detail what transpired on that occasion between Mr.
Runnington, and Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, with whom he was closeted for
nearly an hour. On quitting the office his cheek was flushed, and his
manner somewhat excited. After walking a little way in a moody manner
and with slow step, he suddenly jumped into a hackney-coach, and within
a quarter of an hour's time had secured an inside place in the Tally-ho
coach, which started for York at two o'clock that afternoon--much
doubting within himself, the while, whether he ought not to have set off
at once in a post-chaise and four. He then made one or two calls in the
Temple; and, hurrying home to the office, made hasty arrangements for
his sudden journey into Yorkshire. He was a calm and experienced man--in
fact, a first-rate man of business; and you may be assured that this
rapid and decisive movement of his had been the result of some very
startling disclosure made to him by Messrs. Quirk and Gammon.

Now, let us glide back to the delightful solitude which we reluctantly
quitted so short a time ago.

Mr. Aubrey was a studious and ambitious man; and in acceding so readily
to the wishes of his wife and sister, to spend the Christmas recess at
Yatton, had been not a little influenced by one consideration, which he
had not thought it worth while to mention--namely, that it would afford
him an opportunity of addressing himself with effect to a very important
and complicated question, which was to be brought before the House
shortly after its reassembling, and of which he then knew,
comparatively speaking, nothing at all. For this purpose he had had a
quantity of Parliamentary papers, &c. &c. &c., packed up and sent down
by coach; and he quite gloated over the prospect of their being duly
deposited upon his table, in the tranquil leisure of his library, at
Yatton. But quietly as he supposed all this to have been managed, Mrs.
Aubrey and Kate had a most accurate knowledge of his movements, and
resolved within themselves, (being therein comforted and assisted by old
Mrs. Aubrey,) that, as at their instances Mr. Aubrey had come down to
Yatton, so they would take care that he should have not merely nominal,
but real holidays. Unless he thought fit to rise at an early hour in the
morning, (which Mrs. Aubrey, junior, took upon herself to say _she_
would take care should never be the case,) it was decreed that he should
not be allowed to waste more than two hours a-day alone in his library.
'T was therefore in vain for him to sit at breakfast with eye aslant and
thought-laden brow, as if meditating a long day's seclusion; somehow or
another, he never got above an hour to himself. He was often momentarily
petulant on these occasions, and soon saw through the designs of his
enemies; but he so heartily and tenderly loved them--so thoroughly
appreciated the affection which dictated their little manœuvres--that
he soon surrendered at discretion, and, in fact, placed himself almost
entirely at their mercy; resolving to make up for lost time on his
return to town, and earnestly hoping that the interests of the nation
would not suffer in the mean while! In short, the ladies of Yatton had
agreed on their line of operations: that almost every night of their
stay in the country should be devoted either to entertaining or visiting
their neighbors; and as a preparatory movement, that the days (weather
permitting) should be occupied with exercise in the open air; in making
"morning" calls on neighbors at several miles' distance from the Hall
and from each other; and from which they generally returned only in time
enough to dress for dinner. As soon, indeed, as the _York True Blue_
(the leading county paper) had announced the arrival at Yatton of
"Charles Aubrey, Esq., M. P., and his family, for the Christmas recess,"
the efforts of Mrs. and Miss Aubrey were most powerfully seconded by a
constant succession of visitors--by

    "Troops of friends,"

as the lodge-keeper could have testified; for he and his buxom wife were
continually opening and shutting the great gates. On the Monday after
Christmas-day, (_i. e._ the day but one following,) came cantering up to
the Hall Lord De la Zouch and Mr. Delamere, of course staying to
luncheon and bearing a most pressing invitation from Lady De la Zouch,
zealously backed by themselves, for the Aubreys to join a large party at
Fotheringham Castle on New-Year's Eve. This was accepted--a day and a
night were thus gone at a swoop. The same thing happened with the
Oldfields, their nearest neighbors; with Sir Percival Pickering at
Luddington Court, where was a superb new picture-gallery to be
critically inspected by Mr. Aubrey--the Earl of Oldacre, a college
friend of Mr. Aubrey's--the venerable Lady Stratton, the earliest friend
and schoolfellow of old Mrs. Aubrey, and so forth. Then Kate had several
visits to pay on her own account; and being fond of horseback, but not
of riding about the country with only a groom in attendance, her brother
_must_ accompany her on these occasions. The first week of their stay in
the country was devoted to visiting their neighbors and friends in the
way I have stated; the next was to be spent in receiving them at Yatton,
during which time the old Hall was to ring with merry hospitality.

Then there was a little world of other matters to occupy Mr. Aubrey's
attention, and which naturally crowded upon him, living so little as he
had latterly lived at Yatton. He often had a kind of levee of his
humbler neighbors, tenants, and constituents; and on these occasions his
real goodness of nature, his simplicity, his patience, his forbearance,
his sweetness of temper, his benevolence, shone conspicuous. With all
these more endearing qualities, there was yet a placid dignity about him
which would have chilled undue familiarity, and repelled
presumption--had they ventured to manifest themselves. He had here no
motive or occasion for ostentation, or, as it is called,
popularity-hunting. In a sense it might be said of him, that he was
"monarch of all he surveyed." It is true, he was member for the
borough--an honor, however, for which he was indebted to the natural
influence of his commanding position--one which left him his own master,
not converting him into a paltry delegate, handcuffed by pledges on
public questions, and laden with injunctions concerning petty local
interests only--liable, moreover, to be called to an account at any
moment by ignorant and insolent demagogues--but a member of Parliament
training to become a statesman, possessed of a free-will, and therefore
capable of independent and enlightened deliberations; placed by his
fortune above the reach of temptation--but I shall not go any farther,
for the portraiture of a member of Parliament of those days suggests
such a humiliating and bitter contrast, that I shall not ruffle either
my own or my reader's temper by sketching one of modern days. On the
occasions I have been alluding to, Mr. Aubrey was not only condescending
and generous, but practically acute and discriminating; qualities of
his, these latter, so well known, however, as to leave him at length
scarce any opportunities of exercising them. His quiet but decisive
interference put an end to many local unpleasantnesses and annoyances,
and caused his increasing absence from Yatton to be very deeply
regretted. Was a lad or a wench taking to idle and dissolute courses? A
kind, or, as the occasion required, a stern expostulation of his--for he
was a justice of the peace moreover--brought them to their senses. He
had a very happy knack of reasoning and laughing quarrelsome neighbors
into reconciliation and good-humor. He had a keen eye after the
practical details of agriculture; was equally quick at detecting an
inconvenience, and appreciating--sometimes even suggesting--a remedy;
and had, on several occasions, brought such knowledge to bear very
effectively upon discussions in Parliament. His constituents, few in
number undoubtedly, and humble, were quite satisfied with, and proud of,
their member; and his unexpected appearance diffused among them real and
general satisfaction. As a landlord, he was beloved by his numerous
tenantry; and well he might--for never was there so easy and liberal a
landlord: he might at any time have increased his rental by £1,500 or
£2,000 a-year, as his steward frequently intimated to him--but in vain.
"Ten thousand a-year," would say Mr. Aubrey, "is far more than my
necessities require--it affords me and my family every luxury that I can
conceive of; and its magnitude reminds me constantly that hereafter I
shall be called upon to give a very strict and solemn account of _my_
stewardship." I would my space could admit of my completing, as it ought
to be completed, this portraiture of a true Christian gentleman!

As he rode up to the Hare and Hounds Inn, at Grilston, one morning, to
transact some little business, and also to look in on the Farmers' Club,
which was then holding one of its fortnightly meetings, (every one
touching his hat and bowing to him on each side of the long street, as
he slowly passed up it,) he perceived that his horse limped on one
foot. On dismounting, therefore, he stopped to see what was the matter,
while his groom took up the foot to examine it.

"Dey-vilish fine horse!" exclaimed the voice of one standing close
beside him, and in a tone of most disagreeable confidence. The
exclamation was addressed to Mr. Aubrey; who, on turning to the speaker,
beheld a young man--('twas, in fact, Titmouse)--dressed in a style of
the most extravagant absurdity. One hand was stuck into the hinder
pocket of a stylish top-coat, (the everlasting tip of a white
pocket-handkerchief glistening at the mouth of his breast-pocket;) the
other held a cigar to his mouth, from which, as he addressed Mr. Aubrey
with an air of signal assurance, he slowly expelled the smoke which he
had inhaled. Mr. Aubrey turned towards him with a cold and surprised
air, without replying; at the same time wondering where he had seen the
ridiculous object before.

"The horses in these parts ar'n't to be compared with them at
London--eh, sir?" quoth Titmouse, approaching closer to Mr. Aubrey and
his groom, to see what the latter was doing--who, on hearing Titmouse's
last sally, gave him a very significant look.

"I'm afraid the people here won't relish your remarks, sir!" replied Mr.
Aubrey, calmly--hardly able to forbear a smile; at the same time, with
an astonished air, scanning the figure of his companion from head to
foot.

"Who cares?" inquired Titmouse, with a very energetic oath. At this
moment up came a farmer, who, observing Mr. Aubrey, made him a very low
bow. Mr. Aubrey's attention being at the moment occupied with Titmouse,
he did not observe the salutation; not so with Titmouse, who, conceiving
it to have been directed to himself, acknowledged it by taking off his
hat with great grace! Mr. Aubrey presently entered the house, having
ordered his groom to bring back the horse in an hour's time.

"Pray," said he, mildly, to the landlady, "who is that person smoking
the cigar outside?"

"Why, sir," she replied, "he's a Mr. _Brown_; and has another with him
here--who's going up to London by this afternoon's coach--this one stays
behind a day or two longer. They're queer people, sir. Such dandies! Do
nothing but smoke, and drink brandy and water, sir; only that t' other
writes a good deal."

"Well, I wish you would remind him," said Mr. Aubrey, smiling, "that, if
he thinks fit to speak to _me_ again, or in my presence, I am a
magistrate, and have the power of fining him five shillings for every
oath he utters."

"What! sir," quoth she, reverently--"has he been speaking to _you_?
Well, I never!! He's the most forward little upstart I ever see'd!" said
she, dropping her voice; "and the sooner he takes himself off from here
the better; for he's always winking at the maids and talking impudence
to them. I'se box his ears, I warrant him, one of these times!" Mr.
Aubrey smiled, and went up-stairs.

"There don't seem to be _much_ wrong," quoth Titmouse to the groom, with
a condescending air, as soon as Mr. Aubrey had entered the house.

"Much you know about it, I don't guess!" quoth Sam, with a contemptuous
smile.

"Who's your master, fellow?" inquired Titmouse, knocking off the ashes
from the tip of his cigar.

"A gentleman. What's _yours_?"

"Curse your impudence, you vagabond"---- The words were hardly out of
his mouth before Sam, with a slight tap of his hand, had knocked
Titmouse's glossy hat off his head, and Titmouse's purple-hued hair
stood exposed to view, provoking the jeers and laughter of one or two
bystanders. Titmouse appeared about to strike the groom; who, hastily
giving the bridles of his horses into the hands of an hostler, threw
himself into boxing attitude; and being a clean, tight-built, stout
young fellow, looked a very formidable object, as he came squaring
nearer and nearer to the dismayed Titmouse; and on behalf of the
outraged honor of all the horses of Yorkshire, was just going to let fly
his _one-two_, when a sharp tapping at the bow-window overhead startled
him for a moment, interrupting his war-like demonstrations; and, on
casting up his eyes, he beheld the threatening figure of his master, who
was shaking his whip at him. He dropped his guard, touched his hat very
humbly, and resumed his horses' bridles; muttering, however, to
Titmouse, "If thou'rt a man, come down into t' yard, and I'll mak thee
think a horse kicked thee, a liar as thou art!"

"Who's that gentleman gone up-stairs?" inquired Titmouse of the
landlady, after he had sneaked into the inn.

"Squire Aubrey of Yatton," she replied tartly. Titmouse's face,
previously very pale, flushed all over. "Ay, ay," she continued
sharply--"thou _must_ be chattering to the grand folks, and thou'st
nearly put thy foot into 't at last, I can tell thee; for that's a
magistrate, and thou'st been a-swearing afore him." Titmouse smiled
rather faintly; and entering the parlor, affected to be engaged with a
county newspaper; and he remained very quiet for upwards of an hour, not
venturing out of the room till he had seen off Mr. Aubrey and his
formidable Sam.

It was the hunting season; but Mr. Aubrey, though he had as fine horses
as were to be found in the county, and which were always at the service
of his friends, partly from want of inclination, and partly from the
delicacy of his constitution, never shared in the sports of the field.
Now and then, however, he rode to cover, to see the hounds throw off,
and exchange greetings with a great number of his friends and
neighbors, on such occasions collected together. This he did, the
morning after that on which he had visited Grilston, accompanied, at
their earnest entreaty, by Mrs. Aubrey and Kate. I am not painting
angels, but describing frail human nature; and truth forces me to say,
that Kate had a kind of a notion that on such occasions she did not
appear to disadvantage. I protest I love her not the less for it! Is
there a beautiful woman under the sun who is not really aware of her
charms, and of the effect they produce upon our sex? Pooh! I never will
believe to the contrary. In Kate's composition this ingredient was but
an imperceptible alloy in virgin gold. Now, how was it that she came to
think of this hunting appointment? I do not exactly know; but I
recollect that when Lord De la Zouch last called at Yatton, he happened
to mention it at lunch, and to say that he and one Geoffrey Lovel
Delamere---- but however that may be, behold, on a bright Thursday
morning, Aubrey and his two lovely companions made their welcome
appearance at the field, superbly mounted, and most cordially greeted by
all present. Miss Aubrey attracted universal admiration; but there was
one handsome youngster, his well-formed figure showing to great
advantage in his new pink and leathers, who made a point of challenging
her special notice, and in doing so, attracting that of all his envious
fellow-sportsmen; and that was Delamere. He seemed, indeed, infinitely
more taken up with the little party from Yatton than with the serious
business of the day. His horse, however, had an eye to business; and
with erect ears, catching the first welcome signal sooner than the
gallant person who sat upon it, sprang off like lightning and would have
left its abstracted _rider_ behind, had he not been a first-rate
"_seat_." In fact, Kate herself was not sufficiently on her guard; and
her eager filly suddenly put in requisition all her rider's little and
skill to rein her in--which having done, Kate's eye looked rather
anxiously after her late companion, who, however, had already cleared
the first hedge, and was fast making up to the scattering scarlet crowd.
Oh, the bright exhilarating scene!

"Heigh ho--Agnes!" said Kate, with a slight sigh, as soon as Delamere
had disappeared--"I was very nearly off."

"So was somebody else, Kate!" said Mrs. Aubrey, with a sly smile.

"This is a very cool contrivance of yours, Kate,--- bringing us here
this morning," said her brother, rather gravely.

"What _do_ you mean, Charles?" she inquired, slightly reddening. He
good-naturedly tapped her shoulder with his whip, laughed, urged his
horse into a canter, and they were all soon on their way to General
Grim's, an old friend of the late Mr. Aubrey's.

The party assembled on New-Year's Eve at Fotheringham Castle, the
magnificent residence of Lord De la Zouch, was numerous and brilliant.
The Aubreys arrived about five o'clock; and on emerging from their
respective apartments into the drawing-room, soon after the welcome
sound of the dinner bell--Mr. Aubrey leading in his lovely wife,
followed shortly afterwards by his beautiful sister--they attracted
general attention. He himself looked handsome, for the brisk country air
had brought out a glow upon his too frequently pallid
countenance--pallid with the unwholesome atmosphere, the late hours, the
wasting excitement of the House of Commons; and his smile was cheerful,
his eye bright and penetrating. Nothing makes such quick triumphant way
in English society, as the promise of speedy political distinction. It
will supply to its happy possessor the want of family and fortune--it
rapidly melts away all distinctions. The obscure but eloquent commoner
finds himself suddenly standing in the rarefied atmosphere of privilege
and exclusiveness--the familiar equal, often the conscious superior, of
the haughtiest peer of the realm. A single successful speech in the
House of Commons, opens before its utterer the shining doors of fashion
and greatness as if by magic. It is as it were POWER stepping into its
palace, welcomed by gay crowds of eager, obsequious expectants. Who
would not press forward to grasp in anxious welcome the hand which, in a
few short years, may dispense the glittering baubles sighed after by the
great, and the more substantial patronage of office--which may point
public opinion in any direction? But, to go no farther, what if to all
this be added a previous position in society, such as that occupied by
Mr. Aubrey! There were several very fine women, married and single, in
that splendid drawing-room; but there were two girls, in very different
styles of beauty, who were soon allowed by all present to carry off the
palm between them--I mean Miss Aubrey and Lady Caroline Caversham, the
only daughter of the Marchioness of Redborough, both of whom were on a
visit at the castle of some duration. Lady Caroline and Miss Aubrey were
of about the same age, and dressed almost exactly alike, viz. in white
satin; only Lady Caroline wore a brilliant diamond necklace, whereas
Kate had chosen to wear not a single ornament.

Lady Caroline was a trifle the taller, and had a very stately carriage.
Her hair was black as jet--her features were refined and delicate; but
they wore a very cold, haughty expression. After a glance at her
half-closed eyes, and the swan-like curve of her snowy neck, you
unconsciously withdrew from her, as from an inaccessible beauty. The
more you looked at her, the more she satisfied your critical scrutiny;
but your _feelings_ went not out towards her--they were, in a manner,
chilled and repulsed. Look, now, at our own Kate Aubrey--nay, never
fear to place her beside yon supercilious divinity--look at her, and
your _heart_ acknowledges her loveliness; your soul thrills at sight of
her bewitching blue eyes--eyes now sparkling with excitement, then
languishing with softness, in accordance with the varying emotions of a
sensitive nature--a most susceptible heart. How her sunny curls
harmonize with the delicacy and richness of her complexion! Her figure,
observe, is, of the two, a trifle fuller than her rival's--stay, don't
let your admiring eyes settle so intently upon her budding form, or you
will confuse Kate--turn away, or she will shrink from you like the
sensitive plant! Lady Caroline seems the exquisite but frigid production
of a skilful statuary, who had caught a divinity in the very act of
disdainfully setting her foot for the first time upon this poor earth of
ours; but Kate is a living and breathing beauty--as it were, fresh from
the hand of God himself!

Kate was very affectionately greeted by Lady De la Zouch, a lofty and
dignified woman of about fifty; so also by Lord De la Zouch; but when
young Delamere welcomed her with a palpable embarrassment of manner, a
more brilliant color stole into her cheek, and a keen observer might
have noticed a little, rapid, undulating motion in her bosom, which told
of some inward emotion. And a keen observer Kate at that moment had in
her beautiful rival; from whose cheek, as that of Kate deepened in its
roseate bloom, faded away the color entirely, leaving it the hue of the
lily. Her drooping eyelids could scarcely conceal the glances of alarm
and anger which she darted at her plainly successful rival in the
affections of the future Lord De la Zouch. Kate was quickly aware of
this state of matters; and it required no little self-control to appear
_un_aware of it. Delamere took her down to dinner, and seated himself
beside her, and paid her such pointed attentions as at length really
distressed her; and she was quite relieved when the time came for the
ladies to withdraw. That she had not a secret yearning towards Delamere,
the frequent companion of her early days, I cannot assert, because I
know it would be contrary to the fact. Circumstances had kept him on the
Continent for more than a year between the period of his quitting Eton
and going to Oxford, where another twelve-month had slipped away without
his visiting Yorkshire: thus two years had elapsed--and behold Kate had
become a woman and he a man! They had mutual predispositions towards
each other, and 'twas mere accident which of them first manifested
symptoms of fondness for the other--the same result must have followed,
namely, (to use a great word,) reciprocation. Lord and Lady De la Zouch
idolized their son, and were old and very firm friends of the Aubrey
family; and, if Delamere really formed an attachment to one of Miss
Aubrey's beauty, accomplishments, talent, amiability, and ancient
family--why should he not be gratified? Kate, whether she would or not,
was set down to the piano, Lady Caroline accompanying her on the
harp--on which she usually performed with mingled skill and grace; but
on the present occasion, both the fair performers found fault with their
instruments--then with themselves--and presently gave up the attempt in
despair. But when, at a later period of the evening, Kate's spirits had
been a little exhilarated with dancing, and she sat down, at Lord De la
Zouch's request, and gave that exquisite song from the _Tempest_--"Where
the bee sucks"--all the witchery of her voice and manner had returned;
and as for Delamere, he would have given the world to marry her that
minute, and so forever extinguish the hopes of--as he imagined--two or
three nascent competitors for the beautiful prize then present.

That Kate was good as beautiful, the following little incident, which
happened to her on the ensuing evening, will show. There was a girl in
the village at Yatton, about sixteen or seventeen years old, called
Phœbe Williams; a very pretty girl, and who had spent about two years
at the Hall as a laundry-maid, but had been obliged, some few months
before the time I am speaking of, to return to her parents in the
village, ill of a decline. She had been a sweet-tempered girl in her
situation, and all her fellow-servants felt great interest in her, as
also did Miss Aubrey. Mrs. Aubrey sent her daily jellies, sago, and
other such matters, suitable for the poor girl's condition; and about a
quarter of an hour after her return from Fotheringham, Miss Aubrey,
finding one of the female servants about to set off with some of the
above-mentioned articles, and hearing that poor Phœbe was getting
rapidly worse, instead of retiring to her room to undress, slipped on an
additional shawl, and resolved to accompany the servant to the village.
She said not a word to either her mother, her sister-in-law, or her
brother; but simply left word with her maid whither she was going, and
that she should quickly return. It was snowing smartly when Kate set
off; but she cared not, hurried on by the impulse of kindness, which led
her to pay perhaps a last visit to the humble sufferer. She walked
alongside of the elderly female servant, asking her a number of
questions about Phœbe, and her sorrowing father and mother. It was
nearly dark as they quitted the Park gates, and snowing, if anything,
faster than when they had left the Hall. Kate, wrapping her shawl still
closer round her slender figure, her face being pretty well protected by
her veil, hurried on, and they soon reached Williams' cottage. Its
humble tenants were, as may be imagined, not a little surprised at her
appearance at such an hour and in such inclement weather, and so
apparently unattended. Poor Phœbe, worn to a shadow, was sitting
opposite the fire, in a little wooden armchair, and propped up by a
pillow. She trembled, and her lips moved on seeing Miss Aubrey, who,
sitting down on a stool beside her, after laying aside her snow-whitened
shawl and bonnet, spoke to her in the most gentle and soothing strain
imaginable. What a contrast in their two figures! 'T would have been no
violent stretch of imagination to say, that Catherine Aubrey at that
moment looked like a ministering angel sent to comfort the wretched
sufferer in her extremity. Phœbe's father and mother stood on each
side of the little fireplace, gazing with tearful eyes upon their only
child, soon about to depart from them forever. The poor girl was indeed
a touching object. She had been very pretty, but now her face was white
and wofully emaciated--the dread impress of consumption was upon it. Her
wasted fingers were clasped together on her lap, holding between them a
little handkerchief, with which, evidently with great effort, she
occasionally wiped the dampness from her face.

"You're very good, ma'am," she whispered, "to come to see me, and so
late. They say it's a sad cold night."

"I heard, Phœbe, that you were not so well, and I thought I would
just step along with Margaret, who has brought you some more jelly. Did
you like the last!"

"Y-e-s, ma'am," she replied hesitatingly; "but it's _very_ hard for me
to swallow anything now, my throat feels so sore." Here her mother shook
her head and looked aside; for the doctor had only that morning
explained to her the nature of the distressing symptom to which her
daughter was alluding--as evidencing the very last stage of her fatal
disorder.

"I'm very sorry to hear you say so, Phœbe," replied Miss Aubrey. "Do
you think there's anything else that Mrs. Jackson could make for you?"

"No, ma'am, thank you; I feel it's no use trying to swallow anything
more," said poor Phœbe, faintly.

"While there's life," whispered Miss Aubrey, in a subdued, hesitating
tone, "there's hope--_they say_." Phœbe shook her head mournfully.

"Don't stop long, dear lady--it's getting very late for you to be out
alone. Father will go"----

"Never mind me, Phœbe--I can take care of myself. I hope you mind
what good Dr. Tatham says to you? You know this sickness is from God,
Phœbe. He knows what is best for his creatures."

"Thank God, ma'am, I think I feel resigned. I know it is God's will; but
I'm very sorry for poor father and mother--they'll be so lone like when
they don't see Phœbe about." Her father gazed intently at her, and
the tears ran trickling down his cheeks; her mother put her apron before
her face, and shook her head in silent anguish. Miss Aubrey did not
speak for a few moments. "I see you have been reading the prayer-book
mamma gave you when you were at the Hall," said she at length, observing
the little volume lying open on Phœbe's lap.

"Yes, ma'am--I was _trying_; but somehow lately, I can't read, for
there's a kind of mist comes over my eyes, and I can't see."

"That's weakness, Phœbe," said Miss Aubrey, quickly but tremulously.

"May I make bold, ma'am," commenced Phœbe, languidly, after a
hesitating pause, "to ask _you_ to read the little psalm I was trying to
read a while ago? I should so like to hear _you_."

"I'll try, Phœbe," said Miss Aubrey, taking the book, which was open
at the sixth psalm. 'Twas a severe trial, for her feelings were not a
little excited already. But how could she refuse the dying girl? So Miss
Aubrey began a little indistinctly, in a very low tone, and with
frequent pauses; for the tears every now and then quite obscured her
sight. She managed, however, to get as far as the sixth verse, which was
thus:--

     _"I am weary of my groaning: every night wash I my bed, and water
     my couch with tears: My beauty is gone for very trouble."_

Here Kate's voice suddenly stopped. She buried her face for a moment or
two in her handkerchief, and said hastily, "I can't read any more,
Phœbe!" Every one in the little room was in tears except poor
Phœbe, who seemed past that.

"It's time for me to go, now, Phœbe. We'll send some one early in the
morning to know how you are," said Miss Aubrey, rising and putting on
her bonnet and shawl. She contrived to beckon Phœbe's mother to the
back of the room, and silently slipped a couple of guineas into her
hands; for she knew the mournful occasion there would soon be for such
assistance! She then left, peremptorily declining the attendance of
Phœbe's father--saying that it _must_ be dark when she could not find
the way to the Hall, which was almost in a straight line from the
cottage, and little more than a quarter of a mile off. It was very much
darker, and it still snowed, though not so thickly as when she had come.
She and Margaret walked side by side, at a quick pace, talking together
about poor Phœbe. Just as she was approaching the extremity of the
village, nearest the park--

"Ah! my lovely gals!" exclaimed a voice, in a low but most offensive
tone--"alone? How uncommon"--Miss Aubrey for a moment seemed
thunderstruck at so sudden and unprecedented an occurrence: then she
hurried on with a beating heart, whispering to Margaret to keep close to
her, and not to be alarmed. The speaker, however, kept pace with them.

"Lovely gals!--wish I'd an umbrella, my angels!--Take my arm? Ah! Pretty
gals!"

"Who _are_ you, sir?" at length exclaimed Kate, spiritedly, suddenly
stopping, and turning to the rude speaker.

[Who else should it be but Tittlebat Titmouse!] "Who am I? Ah, ha!
Lovely gals! one that loves the pretty gals!"

"Do you know, fellow, who I am?" inquired Miss Aubrey, indignantly,
flinging aside her veil, and disclosing her beautiful face, white as
death, but indistinctly visible in the darkness, to her insolent
assailant.

"No, 'pon my soul, no; but lovely gal! lovely gal!--'pon my life,
spirited gal!--do you no harm! Take my arm?"----

"Wretch! ruffian! How dare you insult a lady in this manner? Do you know
who I am? My name, sir, is Aubrey--I am Miss Aubrey of the Hall! Do not
think"----

Titmouse felt as if he were on the point of dropping down dead at that
moment, with amazement and terror; and when Miss Aubrey's servant
screamed out at the top of her voice, "Help!--help, there!" Titmouse,
without uttering a syllable more, took to his heels, just as the door of
a cottage, at only a few yards' distance, opened, and out rushed a
strapping farmer, shouting--"Hey! what be t' matter?" You may guess his
amazement on discovering Miss Aubrey, and his fury at learning the cause
of her alarm. Out of doors he pelted, without his hat, uttering a volley
of fearful imprecations, and calling on the unseen miscreant to come
forward; for whom it was lucky that he had time to escape from a pair of
fists that in a minute or two would have beaten his little carcass into
a jelly! Miss Aubrey was so overcome by the shock she had suffered, that
but for a glass of water she might have fainted. As soon as she had a
little recovered from her agitation, she set off home, accompanied by
Margaret, and followed very closely by the farmer, with a tremendous
knotted stick under his arm--(he wanted to have taken his
double-barrelled gun)--and thus she soon reached the Hall, not a little
tired and agitated. This little incident, however, she kept to herself,
and enjoined her two attendants to do the same; for she knew the
distress it would have occasioned those whom she loved. As it was she
was somewhat sharply rebuked by her mother and brother, who had just
sent two servants out in quest of her, and whom it was singular that she
should have missed. This is not the place to give an account of the
eccentric movements of our friend Titmouse; still there can be no harm
in my just mentioning that the sight of Miss Aubrey on horseback had
half maddened the little fool; her image had never been effaced from his
memory since the occasion on which, as already explained, he had first
seen her; and as soon as he had ascertained, through Snap's inquiries,
who she was, he became more frenzied in the matter than before, because
he thought he now saw a probability of obtaining her. "If, like
children," says Edmund Burke, "we will cry for the moon, why, like
children, we must--_cry on_." Whether this was not something like the
position of Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse, in his passion for CATHERINE AUBREY,
the reader can judge. He had unbosomed himself in the matter to his
confidential adviser, Mr. Snap; who, having accomplished his errand, had
the day before returned to town, very much against his will, leaving
Titmouse behind, to bring about, by his own delicate and skilful
management, an union between himself, as the future lord of Yatton, and
the beautiful sister of its present occupant.




CHAPTER IX.


Mr. Aubrey and Kate, some day or two after the strange occurrence
narrated in the last chapter, were sitting together playing at chess,
about eight o'clock in the evening; Dr. Tatham and Mrs. Aubrey, junior,
looking on with much interest; old Mrs. Aubrey being engaged in writing.
Mr. Aubrey was sadly an overmatch for poor Kate--he being in fact a
first-rate player; and her soft white hand had been hovering over the
three or four chessmen she had left, uncertain which of them to move,
for nearly two minutes, her chin resting on the other hand, and her face
wearing a very puzzled expression. "Come, Kate," said every now and then
her brother, with that calm victorious smile which at such a moment
would have tried any but so sweet a temper as his sister's. "If _I_ were
you, Miss Aubrey," was perpetually exclaiming Dr. Tatham, knowing as
much about the game the while as the little Blenheim spaniel lying
asleep at Miss Aubrey's feet. "Oh dear!" said Kate, at length, with a
sigh, "I really don't see how to escape"----

"Who can that be?" exclaimed Mrs. Aubrey, looking up and listening to
the sound of carriage wheels.

"Never mind," said her husband, who was interested in the game--"come,
come, Kate." A few minutes afterwards a servant made his appearance, and
coming up to Mr. Aubrey, told him that Mr. Parkinson and another
gentleman had called, and were waiting in the library to speak to him on
business.

"What can they want at this hour?" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, absently,
intently watching an anticipated move of his sister's, which would have
decided the game in his favor. At length she made her long-meditated
descent--but in quite an unexpected quarter.

"Checkmate!" she exclaimed with infinite glee.

"Ah!" cried he, rising with a slightly surprised and chagrined air, "I'm
ruined! Now, try your hand on Dr. Tatham, while I go and speak to these
people. I wonder what can possibly have brought them here. Oh, I see--I
see; 'tis probably about Miss Evelyn's marriage-settlement--I'm to be
one of her trustees." With this he left the room, and presently entered
the library, where were two gentlemen, one of whom, a stranger, was in
the act of pulling off his great-coat. It was Mr. Runnington; a tall,
thin, elderly man, with short gray hair--of gentlemanly appearance--his
countenance bespeaking the calm, acute, clear-headed man of business.
The other was Mr. Parkinson; a thoroughly respectable,
substantial-looking, hard-headed family solicitor and country attorney.

"Mr. Runnington, my London agent, sir," said he to Mr. Aubrey, as the
latter entered. Mr. Aubrey bowed.

"Pray, gentlemen, be seated," he replied with his usual urbanity of
manner, taking a chair beside them.

"Why, Mr. Parkinson, you look very serious--both of you. What is the
matter?" he inquired surprisedly.

"Mr. Runnington, sir, has arrived, most unexpectedly to me," replied Mr.
Parkinson, "only an hour or two ago, from London, on business of the
last importance to you."

"_To me!_--well, what is it? Pray, say at once what it is--I am all
attention," said Mr. Aubrey, anxiously.

"Do you happen," commenced Mr. Parkinson, very nervously, "to remember
sending Waters to me on Monday or Tuesday last, with a paper which had
been served by some one on old Jolter?"

"Certainly," replied Mr. Aubrey, after a moment's consideration.

"Mr. Runnington's errand is connected with that document," said Mr.
Parkinson, and paused.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, apparently a little relieved. "I assure
you, gentlemen, you very greatly over-estimate the importance I attach
to anything that such a troublesome person as Mr. Tomkins can do, if I
am right in supposing that it is he who--Well, then, what _is_ the
matter?" he inquired quickly, observing Mr. Parkinson shake his head,
and interchange a grave look with Mr. Runnington; "you cannot think, Mr.
Parkinson, how you will oblige me by being explicit."

"This paper," said Mr. Runnington, holding up that which Mr. Aubrey at
once identified as the one on which he had cast his eye upon its being
handed to him by Waters, "is a Declaration in Ejectment, with which Mr.
Tomkins has nothing whatever to do. It is served virtually on _you_, and
YOU are the real defendant."

"So I apprehend that I was in the former trumpery action!" replied Mr.
Aubrey, smiling.

"Do you recollect, sir," said Mr. Parkinson, with a trepidation which he
could not conceal, "several years ago, some serious conversation which
you and I had together on the state of your title--when I was preparing
your marriage-settlements?"

Mr. Aubrey started, and his face was suddenly blanched.

"The matters which we then discussed have suddenly acquired fearful
importance. This paper occasions us, on your account, the profoundest
anxiety." Mr. Aubrey continued silent, gazing on Mr. Parkinson with
intensity.

"Supposing, from a hasty glance at it, and from the message accompanying
it, that it was merely another action of Tomkins's about the slip of
waste land attached to Jolter's cottage, I sent up to London to my
agents, Messrs. Runnington, requesting them to call on the plaintiff's
attorneys, and settle the action. He did so; and--perhaps you will
explain the rest," said Mr. Parkinson, with visible trepidation, to Mr.
Runnington.

"Certainly," said that gentleman, with a serious air, but much more
calmly and firmly than Mr. Parkinson had spoken. "I called accordingly,
early yesterday morning, on Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--they are a
very well--but not enviably--known firm in the profession; and in a few
minutes my misconception of the nature of the business which I had
called to arrange, was set right. In short"---- he paused, as if
distressed at the intelligence which he was about to communicate.

"Oh, pray, pray go on, sir!" said Mr. Aubrey, in a low tone.

"I am no stranger, sir, to your firmness of character; but I shall have
to tax it, I fear, to its uttermost. To come at once to the point--they
told me that I might undoubtedly _settle_ the matter, if you would
consent to give up immediate possession of _the whole Yatton estate_,
and account for the mesne profits to their client, the right heir--as
they contend--a Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse." Mr. Aubrey leaned back in his
chair, overcome, for an instant, by this astounding intelligence; and
all three of them preserved silence for more than a minute. Mr.
Runnington was a man of a very feeling heart. In the course of his great
practice he had had to encounter many distressing scenes; but probably
none of them had equalled that in which, at the earnest entreaty of Mr.
Parkinson, who distrusted his own self-possession, he now bore a leading
part. The two attorneys interchanged frequent looks of deep sympathy for
their unfortunate client, who seemed as if stunned by the intelligence
they had brought him.

"I felt it my duty to lose not an instant in coming down to Yatton,"
resumed Mr. Runnington, observing Mr. Aubrey's eye again directed
inquiringly towards him; "for Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap are very
dangerous people to deal with, and must be encountered promptly, and
with the greatest possible caution. The moment that I had left them, I
hastened to the Temple, to retain for you Mr. Subtle, the leader of the
Northern Circuit; but they had been beforehand with me, and retained him
nearly three months ago, together with another eminent king's counsel on
the circuit. Under these circumstances, I lost no time in giving a
special retainer to the Attorney-General, in which I trust I have done
right, and in retaining as junior a gentleman whom I consider to be
incomparably the ablest and most experienced lawyer on the circuit."

"Did they say anything concerning the nature of their client's title?"
inquired Mr. Aubrey, after some expressions of amazement and dismay.

"Very little--I might say, nothing. If they had been _never_ so precise,
of course I should have distrusted every word they said. They certainly
mentioned that they had had the first conveyancing opinions in the
kingdom, which concurred in favor of their client; that they had been
for months prepared at all points, and accident only had delayed their
commencing proceedings till now."

"Did you make any inquiries as to who the claimant was?" inquired Mr.
Aubrey.

"Yes; but all I could learn was, that they had discovered him by mere
accident; and that he was at present in very obscure and distressed
circumstances. I tried to discover by what means they proposed to
commence and carry on so expensive a contest; but they smiled
significantly, and were silent." Another long pause ensued, during which
Mr. Aubrey was evidently silently struggling with very agitating
emotions.

"What is the meaning of their affecting to seek the recovery of only
one insignificant portion of the property?" he inquired.

"It is their own choice--it may be from considerations of mere
convenience. The title, however, by which they may succeed in obtaining
what they at present go for, will avail to recover every acre of the
estate, and the present action will consequently decide everything!"

"And suppose the worst--that they are successful," said Mr. Aubrey,
after they had conversed a good deal, and very anxiously, on the subject
of a presumed infirmity in Mr. Aubrey's title, which had been pointed
out to him in general terms by Mr. Parkinson, on the occasion already
adverted to--"what is to be said about the rental which I have been
receiving all this time--ten thousand a-year?" inquired Mr. Aubrey,
looking as if he dreaded to hear his question answered.

"Oh! that's quite an after consideration--let us first fight the
battle," said Mr. Runnington.

"I beg, sir, that you will withhold nothing from me," said Mr. Aubrey.
"To what extent shall I be liable?"

Mr. Runnington paused.

"I am afraid that _all_ the mesne profits, as they are called, which you
have received"--commenced Mr. Parkinson----

"No, no," interrupted Mr. Runnington; "I have been turning that matter
over in my mind, and I think that the statute of limitations will bar
all but the last six years"----

"Why, _that_ will be sixty thousand pounds!" interrupted Mr. Aubrey,
with a look of sudden despair. "Gracious Heavens, that is perfectly
frightful!--frightful! If I lose Yatton, I shall not have a place to put
my head in--not one farthing to support myself with! And yet to have to
make up _sixty thousand pounds_!" The perspiration bedewed his forehead,
and his eye was laden with alarm and agony. He slowly rose from his
chair and bolted the door, that they might not, at such an agitating
moment, be surprised or disturbed by any of the servants or the family.

"I suppose," said he, in a faint and tremulous tone, "that if this claim
succeed, my mother also will share my fate"----

They shook their heads in silence.

"Permit me to suggest," said Mr. Runnington, in a tone of the most
respectful sympathy, "that sufficient for the day is the evil thereof."

"But the NIGHT follows!" said Mr. Aubrey, with a visible tremor; and his
voice made the hearts of his companions thrill within them. "I have a
fearful misgiving as to the issue of these proceedings! I ought not to
have neglected the matter pointed out to me by Mr. Parkinson on my
marriage! I feel as if I had been culpably lying by ever since!--But I
really did not attach to it the importance it deserved: I never, indeed,
distinctly appreciated the nature of what was then mentioned to me!"

"A thousand pities that a _fine_ was not _levied_, is it not?" said Mr.
Runnington, turning with a sigh to Mr. Parkinson.

"Ay, indeed it is!" replied that gentleman--and they spoke together for
some time, and very earnestly, concerning the nature and efficacy of
such a measure, which they explained to Mr. Aubrey.

"It comes to this," said he, "that in all probability, I and my family
are at this moment"--he shuddered--"trespassers at Yatton!"

"That, Mr. Aubrey," said Mr. Parkinson, earnestly, "remains to be
proved! We really are getting on far too fast. A person who heard us
might suppose that the jury had already returned a verdict against
us--that judgment had been signed--and that the sheriff was coming in
the morning to execute the writ of possession in favor of our opponent."
This was well meant by the speaker; but surely it was like talking of
the machinery of the ghastly guillotine to the wretch in shivering
expectation of suffering by it on the morrow. An involuntary shudder ran
through Mr. Aubrey. "Sixty thousand pounds!" he exclaimed, rising and
walking to and fro. "Why, I am ruined beyond all redemption! How can I
ever satisfy it?" Again he paced the room several times, in silent
agony. Presently he resumed his seat. "I have, for these several days
past, had a strange sense of impending calamity," said he, more
calmly--"I have been equally unable to account for, or get rid of it. It
may be an intimation from Heaven; I bow to its will!"

"We must remember," said Mr. Runnington, "that '_possession is
nine-tenths of the law_;' which means, that your mere possession will
entitle you to retain it against all the world, till a stronger title
than yours to the right of possession be made out. You stand on a
mountain; and it is for your adversary to displace you, not by showing
merely that you have no real title, but that _he has_. If he could prove
all your title-deeds to be merely waste paper--that in fact you have no
more title to Yatton than I have--he would not, if he were to stop
there, have advanced his own case an inch; he must _first_ establish in
himself a clear and independent title; so that you are entirely on the
defensive; and rely upon it, that though never so many screws may be
loose, so acute and profound a lawyer as the Attorney-General will
impose every difficulty on our opponents"----

"Nay, but God forbid that any unconscientious advantage should be taken
on my behalf!" said Mr. Aubrey. Mr. Runnington and Mr. Parkinson both
opened their eyes pretty wide at this sally; the latter could not at
first understand why _everything_ should not be fair in war; the former
saw and appreciated the nobility of soul which had dictated the
exclamation.

"I suppose the affair will soon become public," said Mr. Aubrey, with an
air of profound depression, after much further conversation.

"Your position in the county, your eminence in public life, the
singularity of the case, and the magnitude of the stake--all are
circumstances undoubtedly calculated soon to urge the affair before the
notice of the public," said Mr. Runnington.

"What disastrous intelligence to break to my family!" exclaimed Mr.
Aubrey, tremulously. "With what fearful suddenness it has burst upon us!
But something, I suppose," he presently added with forced calmness,
"must be done immediately?"

"Undoubtedly," replied Mr. Runnington. "Mr. Parkinson and I will
immediately proceed to examine your title-deeds, the greater portion of
which are, I understand, here in the Hall, and the rest at Mr.
Parkinson's; and prepare, without delay, a case for the opinion of the
Attorney-General, and also of the most eminent conveyancers of the
kingdom. Who, by the way," said Mr. Runnington, addressing Mr.
Parkinson--"who was the conveyancer that had the abstracts before him,
on preparing Mr. Aubrey's marriage-settlement?"

"Oh, you are alluding to the '_Opinion_' I mentioned to you this
evening?" inquired Mr. Parkinson. "I have it at my house, and will show
it you in the morning. The doubt he expressed on one or two points gave
me, I recollect, no little uneasiness--as _you_ may remember, Mr.
Aubrey."

"I certainly do," he replied with a profound sigh; "but though what you
said reminded me of something or other that I had heard when a mere boy,
I thought no more of it. I think you also told me that the gentleman
who wrote the opinion was a nervous, fidgety man, always raising
difficulties in his clients' titles--and one way or another, the thing
never gave me any concern--scarcely ever even occurred to my thoughts,
till to-day! What infatuation has been mine!--But you will take a little
refreshment, gentlemen, after your journey?" said Mr. Aubrey, suddenly,
glad of the opportunity it would afford him of reviving his own
exhausted spirits by a little wine, before returning to the
drawing-room. He swallowed several glasses of wine without their
producing any immediately perceptible effect; and the bearers of the
direful intelligence just communicated to the reader, after a promise by
Mr. Aubrey to drive over to Grilston early in the morning, and bring
with him such of his title-deeds as were then at the Hall, took their
departure; leaving him outwardly calmer, but with a fearful oppression
at his heart. He made a powerful effort to control his feelings, so as
to conceal, for a while at least, the dreadful occurrence of the
evening. His countenance and constrained manner, however; on re-entering
the drawing-room, which his mother, attended by Kate, had quitted for
her bedroom--somewhat alarmed Mrs. Aubrey; but he easily quieted
her--poor soul!--by saying that he certainly _had_ been
annoyed--"excessively annoyed"--at a communication just made to him;
"and which might, in fact, prevent his sitting again for Yatton." "Oh,
_that's_ the cause of your long stay? There, Doctor, am I not right?"
said Mrs. Aubrey, appealing to Dr. Tatham. "Did I not tell you that this
was something connected with politics? Oh, dearest Charles--I do _hate_
politics! Give _me_ a quiet home!" A pang shot through Mr. Aubrey's
heart; but he felt that he had, for the present, succeeded in his
object.

Mr. Aubrey's distracted mind was indeed, as it were, buffeted about
that night on a dark sea of trouble; while the beloved being beside him
lay sleeping peacefully, all unconscious of the rising storm! Many
times, during that dismal night, would he have risen from his bed to
seek a momentary relief by walking to and fro, but that he feared
disturbing her, and disclosing the extent and depth of his distress. It
was nearly five o'clock in the morning before he at length sank into
sleep; and of one thing I can assure the reader, that however that
excellent man might have shrunk--and shrink he did--from the sufferings
which seemed in store, not for himself only, but for those who were far
dearer to him than life itself, he did not give way to one repining or
rebellious thought. On the contrary, his real frame of mind, on that
trying occasion, may be discovered in one short prayer, which his
agonized soul was more than once on the point of expressing aloud in
words--"Oh, my God! in my prosperity I have endeavored always to
acknowledge thee; forsake not me and mine in our adversity!"

At an early hour in the morning Mr. Aubrey's carriage drew up at Mr.
Parkinson's door; and he brought with him, as he had promised, a great
number of title-deeds and family documents. On these, as well as on many
others which were in Mr. Parkinson's custody, that gentleman and Mr.
Runnington were anxiously engaged during almost every minute of that day
and the ensuing one; at the close of which, they had between them drawn
up the rough draft of a case, with which Mr. Runnington set off for town
by the mail; undertaking to lay it immediately before the
Attorney-General, and also before one or two of the most eminent
conveyancers of the day, effectually commended to their best and
earliest attention. He pledged himself to transmit their opinions, by
the very first mail, to Mr. Parkinson; and both of those gentlemen
immediately set about active preparations for defending the ejectment.
The "eminent conveyancer" fixed upon by Messrs. Runnington and Parkinson
was Mr. Tresayle, whose clerk, however, on looking into the papers,
presently carried them back to Messrs. Runnington, with the startling
information that Mr. Tresayle had, a few months before, "advised on the
other side!" The next person whom Mr. Runnington thought of,
was--singularly enough--Mr. Mortmain, who, on account of his eminence,
was occasionally employed, in heavy matters, by the firm. _His_ clerk,
also, on the ensuing morning returned the papers, assigning a similar
reason to that which had been given by Mr. Tresayle's clerk! All this
formed a direful corroboration, truly, of Messrs. Quirk and Gammon's
assurance to Mr. Runnington, that they had "had the first conveyancing
opinions in the kingdom;" and evidenced the formidable scale on which
their operations were being conducted. There were, however, other
"eminent conveyancers" besides the two above mentioned; and in the hands
of Mr. Mansfield, who, with a less extended reputation, but an equal
practice, was a far abler man, and a much higher style of conveyancer,
than Mr. Mortmain, Mr. Runnington left his client's interests with the
utmost confidence. Not satisfied with this, he laid the case also before
Mr. Crystal, the junior whom he had already retained in the cause--a man
whose lucid understanding was not ill indicated by his name. Though his
manner in court was not particularly forcible or attractive, he was an
invaluable acquisition in an important cause. To law he had for some
twenty years applied himself with unwearying energy; and he consequently
became a ready, accurate, and thorough lawyer, equal to all the
practical exigencies of his profession. He brought his knowledge to bear
on every point presented to him, with beautiful precision. He was
equally quick and cautious--artful to a degree--But I shall have other
opportunities of describing him; since on him, as on every working
junior, will devolve the real conduct of the defendant's case in the
memorable action of _Doe on the demise of Titmouse_ v. _Roe_.

As Mr. Aubrey was driving home from the visit to Mr. Parkinson, which I
have just above mentioned, he stopped his carriage and alighted, on
entering the village, because he saw Dr. Tatham coming out of Williams's
cottage, where he had been paying a visit to poor dying Phœbe.

The little doctor was plunthering on, ankle-deep in snow, towards the
vicarage, when Mr. Aubrey (who had sent home his carriage with word that
he should presently follow) came up with him, and greeting him with
unusual fervor, said that he would accompany him to the vicarage.

"You are in very great trouble, my dear friend," said the doctor,
seriously--"I saw it plainly last night; but of course I said nothing.
Come in with me! Let us talk freely with one another; for, _as iron
sharpeneth iron, so doth the countenance of a man his friend_. Is it not
so?"

"It is indeed, my dear doctor," replied Mr. Aubrey, suddenly softened by
the affectionate simplicity of the doctor's manner. How much the good
doctor was shocked by the communication which Mr. Aubrey presently made
to him, the reader may easily imagine. He even shed tears, on beholding
the forced calmness with which Mr. Aubrey depicted the gloomy prospect
that was before him. The venerable pastor led the subdued mind of his
companion to those sources of consolation and support which a true
Christian cannot approach in vain. Upon his bruised and bleeding
feelings were poured the balm of true religious consolation; and Mr.
Aubrey quitted his revered companion with a far firmer tone of mind than
that with which he had entered the vicarage. But as soon as he had
passed through the park gates, the sudden reflection that he was
probably no longer the proprietor of the dear old familiar objects that
met his eye at every step, almost overpowered him, and he walked several
times up and down the avenue, before he had recovered a due degree of
self-possession.

On entering the Hall, he was informed that one of the tenants, Peter
Johnson, had been sitting in the servants' hall for nearly two hours,
waiting to see him. Mr. Aubrey repaired at once to the library, and
desired the man to be shown in. This Johnson had been for some
twenty-five years a tenant of a considerable farm on the estate; had
scarcely ever been behind-hand with his rent; and had always been
considered one of the most exemplary persons in the whole neighborhood.
He had now, poor fellow, got into trouble indeed: for he had, a year or
two before, been persuaded to become security for his brother-in-law, a
tax-collector; and had, alas! the day before, been called upon to pay
the three hundred pounds in which he stood bound--his worthless
brother-in-law having absconded with nearly £1,000 of the public money.
Poor Johnson, who had a large family to support, was in deep
tribulation, bowed down with grief and shame; and after a sleepless
night, had at length ventured down to Yatton, with a desperate boldness,
to ask its benevolent owner to advance him £200 towards the money, to
save himself from being cast into prison. Mr. Aubrey heard this sad
story to the end, without one single interruption; though to a more
practised observer than the troubled old farmer, the workings of Mr.
Aubrey's countenance, from time to time, must have told his inward
agitation. "I lend this poor soul £200!" thought he, "who am penniless
myself! Shall I not be really acting as _his_ dishonest relative has
been acting, and making free with money which belongs to another?"

"I assure you, my worthy friend," said he at length, with a little
agitation of manner, "that I have just now a very serious call upon
me--or you know how gladly I would have complied with your request."

"Oh, sir, have mercy on me! I've an ailing wife and seven children to
support," said poor Johnson, wringing his hands.

"Can't I do anything with the Government?"----

"No, sir; I'm told they're so mighty angry with my rascally brother,
they'll listen to nobody! It's a hard matter for me to keep things
straight at home without this, sir, I've so many mouths to fill; and if
they take me off to prison, Lord! Lord! what's to become of us all?"

Mr. Aubrey's lip quivered. Johnson fell on his knees, and the tears ran
down his cheeks. "I've never asked a living man for money before, sir;
and if you'll only lend it me, God Almighty will bless you and yours;
you'll save us all from ruin; I'll work day and night to pay it back
again!"

"Rise--rise, Johnson," said Mr. Aubrey, with emotion. "You shall have
the money, my friend, if you will call to-morrow," he added with a deep
sigh, after a moment's hesitation.

He was as good as his word.[19]

Had Mr. Aubrey been naturally of a cheerful and vivacious turn, the
contrast now afforded by his gloomy manner must have alarmed his family.
As it was, however, the contrast was not so strong and marked as to be
attended with that effect, especially as he exerted himself to the
utmost to conceal his distress. That _something_ had gone wrong, he
freely acknowledged; and as he spoke of it always in connection with
political topics, he succeeded in parrying their questions, and checking
suspicion. But, whenever they were all collected together, could he not
justly compare them to a happy group, unconscious that they stood on a
mine which was on the eve of being fired?

About a week afterwards, namely, on the 12th of January, arrived little
Charles's birthday, when he became five years old; and Kate had for some
days been moving heaven and earth to get up a juvenile ball in honor of
the occasion. After divers urgent despatches, and considerable riding
and driving about, she succeeded in persuading the parents of some eight
or ten children--two little daughters, for instance, of the Earl of
Oldacre (beautiful creatures they were, to be sure)--little Master and
the two Miss Bertons, the children of one of the county members--Sir
Harry Oldfield, an orphan of about five years of age, the infant owner
of a magnificent estate--and two or three little girls beside--to send
them all--cold as was the weather--to Yatton, for a day and a night,
with their governesses and attendants.

'Twas a charming little affair! It went off brilliantly, as the phrase
is, and repaid all Kate's exertions. She, her mother, and brother, and
sister, all dined at the same table, at a very early hour, with the
merry little guests, who, (with a laughable crowd of attendants behind
them, to be sure) behaved remarkably well on the occasion. Sir Harry (a
little thing about Charles's age--the black ribbon round his waist, and
also the half-mourning dress worn by his maid, who stood behind him,
showed how recent was the event which had made him an orphan) proposed
little Aubrey's health, in (I must own) a somewhat stiff speech,
demurely dictated to him by Kate, who sat between him and her beautiful
little nephew. She then performed the same office for Charles, who stood
on a chair while delivering his eloquent acknowledgment of the toast.

[Oh! that anguished brow of thine, Aubrey, (thank God it is
unobserved!) but it tells _me_ that the iron is entering thy soul!]

And the moment that he had done--Kate folding her arms around him and
kissing him--down they all jumped, and, a merry throng, scampered off to
the drawing-room, (followed by Kate,) where blind-man's buff, husbands
and wives, and divers other little games, kept them in constant
enjoyment. After tea, they were to have dancing--Kate mistress of the
ceremonies--and it was quite laughable to see how perpetually she was
foiled in her efforts to form the little sets. The girls were orderly
enough--but their wild little partners were quite uncontrollable! The
instant they were placed, and Kate had gone to the instrument and struck
off a bar or two--ah!--what a scrambling little crowd was to be seen
wildly jumping and laughing, and chattering and singing! Over and over
again she formed them into sets, with the like results. But at length a
young lady, one of their governesses, took Miss Aubrey's place at the
piano, leaving the latter to superintend the performances in person. She
at length succeeded in getting up something like a country-dance, led
off by Charles and little Lady Anne Cherville, the eldest daughter of
the Earl of Oldacre, a beautiful child of about five years old, and who,
judging from appearances, bade fair in due time to become another Lady
Caroline Caversham. You would have laughed outright to watch the
coquettish airs which this little creature gave herself with Charles,
whom yet she evidently could not bear to see dancing with another.

"Now _I_ shall dance with somebody else!" he exclaimed, suddenly
quitting Lady Anne, and snatching hold of a sweet little thing, Miss
Berton, standing modestly beside him. The discarded beauty walked with a
stately air, and a swelling heart, towards Mrs. Aubrey, who sat beside
her husband on the sofa; and on reaching her, stood for a few moments
silently watching her fickle partner busily and gayly engaged with her
successor--Then she burst into tears.

"Charles!" called out Mrs. Aubrey; who had watched the whole affair, and
could hardly keep her countenance--"come hither directly, Charles!"

"Yes, mamma!" he exclaimed--quite unaware of the serious aspect which
things were assuming--and without quitting the dance, where he was (as
his jealous mistress too plainly saw, for, despite her grief, her eye
seemed to follow all his motions) skipping about with infinite glee with
a _third_ partner--a laughing sister of her for whom he had quitted Lady
Anne.

"Do you hear your mamma, Charles!" said Mr. Aubrey, somewhat
peremptorily; and in an instant his little son, all flushed and
breathless, was at his side.

"Well, dear papa!" said he, keeping his eye fixed on the merry throng he
had just quitted, and where his deserted partner was skipping about
alone.

"What have you been doing to Lady Anne, Charles?" said his father.

"Nothing, dear papa!" he replied, still wistfully eying the dancers.

"You know you left me, and went to dance with Miss Berton; you did,
Charles!" said the offended beauty, sobbing.

"That is not behaving like a little gentleman, Charles," said his
father. The tears came to the child's eyes.

"I'm _very_ sorry, dear papa, I _will_ dance with her."

"No, not now," said Lady Anne, haughtily.

"Oh, pooh! pooh!--kiss and be friends," said Mrs. Aubrey, laughing, "and
go and dance as prettily as you were doing before." Little Aubrey put
his arms around Lady Anne, kissed her, and away they both started to the
dance again. While the latter part of this scene was going on, Mr.
Aubrey's eye caught the figure of a servant who simply made his
appearance at the door and then retired, (for such had been Mr. Aubrey's
orders, in the event of any messenger arriving from Grilston.) Hastily
whispering that he should speedily return, he left the room. In the hall
stood a clerk from Mr. Parkinson; and on seeing Mr. Aubrey, he took out
a packet and retired--Mr. Aubrey, with evident trepidation, repairing to
his library. With a nervous hand he broke the seal, and found the
following letter from Mr. Parkinson, with three other enclosures:--

                                            "_Grilston, 12th Jan. 18--._
     "MY DEAR SIR,

     "I have only just received, and at once forward to you, copies of
     the three opinions given by the Attorney-General, Mr. Mansfield,
     and Mr. Crystal. I lament to find that they are all of a
     discouraging character. They were given by their respective writers
     without any of them having had any opportunity of conferring
     together--all the three cases having been laid before them at the
     same time: yet you will observe that each of them has hit upon
     precisely the same point, viz. that the descendants of Geoffrey
     Dreddlington had no right to succeed to the inheritance till there
     was a failure of the heirs of Stephen Dreddlington. If, therefore,
     our discreditable opponents should have unhappily contrived to
     ferret out some person satisfying that designation, (I cannot
     conjecture how they can ever have got upon the scent,) I really
     fear (it is no use disguising matters) we must prepare for a very
     serious struggle. I have been quietly pushing my inquiries in all
     directions, with a view to obtaining a clew to the case intended to
     be set up against us, and which you will find very shrewdly guessed
     at by the Attorney-General. _Nor am I the only party_, I find, in
     the field, who has been making pointed inquiries in your
     neighborhood; but of this more when we meet to-morrow.

                                "I remain,
                                           "Yours most respectfully,
                                                          "J. PARKINSON.
     "CHARLES AUBREY, ESQ., M. P. &c. &c. &c."

Having read this letter, Mr. Aubrey sank back in his chair, and remained
motionless for more than a quarter of an hour. At length he roused
himself, and read over the opinions; the effect of which--as far as he
could comprehend their technicalities--he found had been but too
correctly given by Mr. Parkinson. Some suggestions and inquiries put by
the acute and experienced Mr. Crystal, suddenly revived recollections of
one or two incidents even of his boyish days, long forgotten, but which,
as he reflected upon them, began to reappear to his mind's eye with
sickening distinctness. Wave after wave of apprehension and agony passed
over him, chilling and benumbing his heart within him; so that, when his
little son came some time afterwards running up to him, with a message
from his mamma, that she hoped he could come back to see them all play
at snap-dragon before they went to bed, he replied mechanically, hardly
seeming sensible even of the presence of the laughing and breathless
boy, who quickly scampered back again. At length, with a groan that came
from the depths of his heart, Mr. Aubrey rose and walked to and fro,
sensible of the necessity of exertion, and preparing himself, in some
degree, for encountering his mother, his wife, and his sister. Taking up
his candle, he hastened to his dressing-room, where he hoped, by the aid
of refreshing ablutions, to succeed in effacing at least the stronger of
those traces of suffering which his glass displayed to him, as it
reflected the image of his agitated countenance. A sudden recollection
of the critical and delicate situation of his idolized wife, glanced
through his heart like a keen arrow. He sank upon the sofa, and,
clasping his hands, looked indeed forlorn. Presently the door was pushed
hastily but gently open; and, first looking in to see that it was really
he of whom she was in search, in rushed Mrs. Aubrey, pale and agitated,
having been alarmed by his long-continued absence from the
drawing-room, and the look of the servant, from whom she had learned
that his master had been for some time gone up-stairs.

"Charles! my love! my sweet love!" she exclaimed, rushing in, sitting
down beside him, and casting her arms round his neck. Overcome by the
suddenness of her appearance and movements, for a moment he spoke not.

"For mercy's sake--as you love me!--tell me, dearest Charles, what has
happened!" she gasped, kissing him fervently.

"Nothing--love--nothing," he replied; but his look belied his speech.

"Oh! am not I your wife, dearest? Charles, I shall really go distracted
if you do not tell me what has happened!--I know that
something--something dreadful"--He put his arm round her waist, and drew
her tenderly towards him. He felt her heart beating violently. He kissed
her cold forehead, but spoke not.

"Come, dearest!--my own Charles!--let me share your sorrows," said she,
in a thrilling voice. "Cannot you trust your Agnes? Has not Heaven
_sent_ me to share your anxieties and griefs?"

"I love you, Agnes! ay, perhaps more than ever man loved woman!" he
faltered, as he felt her arms folding him in closer and closer embrace;
and she gazed at him with wild agitation, expecting presently to hear of
some fearful catastrophe.

"I cannot bear this much longer, dearest--I feel I cannot," said she,
rather faintly. "_What_ has happened? What, that you dare not tell _me_?
I can bear anything, while I have you and my children! You have been
unhappy--you have been wretched, Charles, for many days past. I have
felt that you were!--I will not part with you till I know all!"

"You soon _must_ know all, my sweet love; and I take Heaven to witness,
that it is principally on your account, and that of my children, that
I---- in fact, I did not wish any of you to have known it till"----

"You--are never going--_to fight a duel_?" she gasped, turning white as
death.

"Oh! no, no, Agnes! I solemnly assure you! If I could have brought
myself to engage in such an unhallowed affair, would _this_ scene ever
first have occurred? No, no, my own love! Must I then tell you of the
misfortune that has overtaken us?" His words somewhat restored her, but
she continued to gaze at him in mute and breathless apprehension. "Let
me then conceal nothing, Agnes--they are bringing an action against me,
which, if successful, may cause us all to quit Yatton--and it may be,
forever."

"Oh, Charles!" she murmured, her eyes riveted upon his, while she
unconsciously moved still nearer to him and trembled. Her head drooped
upon his shoulder.

"Why is this?" she whispered, after a pause.

"Let us, dearest, talk of it another time. I have now told you what you
asked me."--He poured her out a glass of water. Having drank a little,
she appeared revived.

"Is all lost?--And--_why_? Do, my own Charles--let me know really the
worst!"

"We are young, my Agnes! and have the world before us! Health and
integrity are better than riches! You and our little loves--_the
children which God has given us_--are _my_ riches," said he, gazing at
her with unspeakable tenderness. "Even should it be the will of Heaven
that this affair should go against us--so long as they cannot separate
us from each other, they cannot _really_ hurt us!" She suddenly kissed
him with frantic energy, and an hysteric smile gleamed over her pallid
excited features.

"Calm yourself, Agnes!--calm yourself, for my sake!--as you love me!"
His voice quivered. "Oh, how very weak and foolish I have been to yield
to"----

"No, no, no!" she gasped, evidently laboring with hysteric oppression.
"Hush!" said she, suddenly starting, and wildly leaning forward towards
the door which opened into the gallery leading to the various bedrooms.
He listened--the MOTHER'S ear had been quick and true. He presently
heard the sound of many children's voices approaching: they were the
little party, accompanied by Kate, and their attendants, on their way to
bed; and little Charles's voice was loudest, and his laugh the merriest,
of them all. A dreadful smile gleamed on Mrs. Aubrey's face; her hand
grasped her husband's with convulsive pressure; and she suddenly sank,
rigid and senseless, upon the sofa. He seemed for a moment stunned at
the sight of her motionless figure. Soon, however, recovering his
presence of mind, he rang the bell, and one or two female attendants
quickly appeared, by whose joint assistance Mrs. Aubrey was carried to
her bed in the adjoining room, where, by the use of the ordinary
remedies, she was, after a brief interval, restored to consciousness.
Her first languid look was towards Mr. Aubrey, whose hand she slowly
raised to her lips. She tried to throw a smile over her wan
features--but 't was in vain; and, after a few heavy and half-choking
sobs, her overcharged feelings found relief in a flood of tears. Full of
the liveliest apprehensions as to the effect of this violent emotion
upon her, in her critical condition, he remained with her for some time,
pouring into her ear every soothing and tender expression he could think
of. He at length succeeded in bringing her into a somewhat more tranquil
state than he could have expected. He strictly enjoined the attendants,
who had not quitted their lady's chamber, and whose alarmed and
inquisitive looks he had noticed for some time with anxiety, to preserve
silence concerning what they had so unexpectedly witnessed, adding,
that something unfortunate had happened, of which they would hear but
too soon.

"Are you going to tell Kate?" whispered Mrs. Aubrey, sorrowfully.
"Surely, love, _you_ have suffered enough through _my_ weakness. Wait
till to-morrow. Let her--poor girl!--have a _few_ more happy hours!"

"No, Agnes--it was my own weakness which caused me to be surprised into
this premature disclosure to you. And now I _must_ meet her again
to-night, and I cannot control either my features, or my feelings. Yes,
poor Kate, she must know all to-night! I shall not be long absent,
Agnes." And directing her maid to remain with her till he returned, he
withdrew, and with slow step and heavy heart descended to the library;
preparing himself for another heart-breaking scene--plunging another
innocent and joyous creature into misery, which he believed to be
inevitable. Having looked into the drawing-room as he passed it, and
seen no one there--his mother having, as usual, retired at a very early
hour--he rang his library bell, and desired Miss Aubrey's maid to
request her mistress to come down to him there, as soon as she should be
at leisure. He was glad that the only light in the room was that given
out by the fire, which was not very bright, and so would in some degree
shield his features from, at all events, immediate scrutiny. His heart
ached as, shortly afterwards, he heard Kate's light step crossing the
hall. When she entered, her eyes sparkled with vivacity, and a smile was
on her beauteous cheek. Her dress was slightly disordered, and her hair
half uncurled--the results of her sport with the little ones whom she
had been seeing to bed.

"What merry little things, to be sure!" she commenced laughingly--"I
could not get them to lie still a moment--popping their little heads in
and out of the clothes. A fine time I shall have of it, by-and-by, with
Sir Harry! for he is to be _my_ tiny little bed-fellow, and I dare say I
shall not sleep a wink all night!--Why, Charles, how very--_very_ grave
you look!" she added, quickly observing his eye fixed moodily upon her.

"'Tis you who are so very gay," he replied, endeavoring to smile. "I
want to speak to you, dear Kate," he commenced affectionately--at the
same time rising and closing the door--"on a serious matter. I have
received some letters to-night"----

Kate colored suddenly and violently, and her heart beat; but, sweet
soul! she was mistaken--very, very far off the mark her troubled brother
was aiming at. "And, relying on your strength of mind, I have resolved
to put you at once in possession of what I myself know. Can you bear bad
news well, Kate?"

She turned very pale, and drawing her chair nearer to her brother, said,
"Do not keep me in suspense, Charles--I can bear anything but
suspense--that _is_ dreadful! What has happened? Oh dear," she added,
with sudden alarm, "where are mamma and Agnes?" She started to her feet.

"I assure you they are both well, Kate. My mother is now doubtless
asleep, and as well as she ever was; Agnes is in her bedroom--certainly
much distressed at the news which I am going"----

"Oh why, Charles, did you tell _anything_ distressing to _her_?"
exclaimed Miss Aubrey, with an alarmed air.

"We came together by surprise, Kate! Perhaps, too, it would have been
worse to have kept her in suspense; but she is recovering!--I shall soon
return to her. And now, my dear Kate--I know your strong sense and
spirit--a very great calamity hangs over us. Let you and me," he grasped
her hands affectionately, "stand it steadily, and support those who
cannot!"

"Let me at once know all, Charles. See if I do not bear it as becomes
your sister," said she, with forced calmness.

"If it should become necessary for all of us to retire into
obscurity--into humble obscurity, dear Kate--how do you think you could
bear it?"

"If it will be an honorable obscurity--nay, 'tis quite impossible it can
be a _dis_honorable obscurity," said Miss Aubrey, with a momentary flash
of energy.

"Never, never, Kate! The Aubreys may lose everything on earth but the
jewel HONOR, and love for one another!"

"Let me know all, Charles: I see that something or other shocking has
happened," said Miss Aubrey, in a low tone, with a look of the deepest
apprehension.

"I will tell you the worst, Kate--- a strange claim is set up--by one I
never heard of--to the whole of the property we now enjoy!"

Miss Aubrey started, and the slight color that remained faded entirely
from her cheek. Both were silent for very nearly a minute.

"But is it a _true_ claim, Charles?" she inquired, faintly.

"That remains to be proved. I will, however, disguise nothing from
you--I have woful apprehensions"----

"Do you mean to say that Yatton _is not ours_?" inquired Miss Aubrey,
catching her breath.

"So, alas! my dearest Kate, it is said!"

Miss Aubrey looked bewildered, and pressed her hand to her forehead.

"How shocking!--shocking!--shocking!" she gasped--"What is to become of
mamma?"

"God Almighty will not desert her in her old age. He will desert none of
us, if we only trust in him," said her brother.

Miss Aubrey remained gazing at him intently, and continued perfectly
motionless.

"Must we then all leave Yatton?" said she, faintly, after a while.

"If this claim succeeds--but we shall leave it _together_, Kate."

She threw her arms around his neck, and wept bitterly.

"Hush, hush, Kate!" said he, perceiving the increasing violence of her
emotions, "restrain your feelings for the sake of my mother--and Agnes."

His words had the desired effect: the poor girl made a desperate effort.
Unclasping her arms from her brother's neck, she sat down in her chair,
breathing hard, and pressing her hand upon her heart. After a few
minutes' pause, she said faintly, "I am better now. Do tell me more,
Charles! Let me have something to _think_ about--only don't say anything
about--about--mamma and Agnes!" In spite of herself a visible shudder
ran through her frame.

"It seems, Kate," said he, with all the calmness he could assume--"at
least they are trying to prove--that our branch of the family has
succeeded to the property prematurely--that there is living an heir of
the elder branch--that his case has been taken up by powerful friends;
and--let me tell you the worst at once--even the lawyers consulted by
Mr. Parkinson on my behalf, take a most alarming view of the
possibilities of the case that may be brought against us"----

"But is mamma provided for?" whispered Miss Aubrey, almost
inarticulately. "When I look at her again, I shall drop at her feet
insensible!"

"No, no, Kate, you won't! Heaven will give you strength," said her
brother, in a tremulous voice. "Remember, my only sister--my dearest
Kate! you must support _me_ in my trouble, as I will support you--we
will try to support each other"----

"We will--we will!" interrupted Miss Aubrey--instantly checking,
however, her rising excitement.

"You bear it bravely, my noble girl!" said Mr. Aubrey, fondly, after a
brief interval of silence.

She turned from him her head, and moved her hand--in deprecation of
expressions which might utterly unnerve her. Then she convulsively
clasped her hands over her forehead; and, after a minute or two, turned
towards him with tears in her eyes, but tranquillized features. The
struggle had been dreadful, though brief--her noble spirit had recovered
itself.

----'T was like some fair bark, in mortal conflict with the black and
boiling waters and howling hurricane; long quivering on the brink of
destruction, but at last outliving the storm, righting itself, and
suddenly gliding into safe and tranquil waters!----

The distressed brother and sister sat conversing for a long time,
frequently in tears, but with infinitely greater calmness and firmness
than could have been expected. They agreed that Dr. Tatham should very
early in the morning be sent for, and implored to take upon himself the
bitter duty of breaking the matter as gradually and safely as possible
to Mrs. Aubrey; its effects upon whom, her children anticipated with the
most vivid apprehension. They both considered that an event of such
publicity and importance could not possibly remain long unknown to her,
and that it was, on the whole, better that the dreaded communication
should be got over as soon as possible. They then retired--Kate to a
sleepless pillow, and her brother to spend a greater portion of the
night in attempts to soothe and console his suffering wife; each of them
having first knelt in humble reverence, and poured forth the breathings
of a stricken and bleeding heart, before Him who hath declared that he
is ever present to HEAR and to ANSWER prayer.

Ah! who can tell what a day or an hour may bring forth?

       *       *       *       *       *

"It won't kindle--not a bit on't--it's green and full o' sap. Go out,
and get us a log that's dry and old, George--and let's try to have a bit
of a blaze in t'ould chimney, this bitter night," said Isaac Tonson, the
gamekeeper at Yatton, to the good-natured landlord of the Aubrey Arms,
the little--and only--inn of the village. The suggestion was instantly
attended to.

"How Peter's a-feathering of his geese to-night, to be sure!" exclaimed
the landlord on his return, shaking the snow off his coat, and laying on
the fire a great dry old log of wood, which seemed very acceptable to
the hungry flames, for they licked it cordially the moment it was placed
among them, and there was very soon given out a cheerful blaze. 'T was a
snug room. The brick floor was covered with fresh sand; and on a few
stools and benches, with a table in the middle, on which stood a large
can and ale-glasses, with a plate of tobacco, sat some half-dozen men,
enjoying their pipe and glass. In the chimney corner sat Thomas Dickons,
the faithful under-bailiff of Mr. Aubrey, a big broad-shouldered,
middle-aged man, with a hard-featured face and a phlegmatic air. In the
opposite corner sat the little grizzle-headed clerk and sexton, old
Hallelujah--(as he was called, but his real name was Jonas Higgs.)
Beside him sat Pumpkin, the gardener at the Hall, a very frequent guest
at the Aubrey Arms o' nights--always attended by Hector, the large
Newfoundland dog already spoken of, and who was now lying stretched on
the floor at Pumpkin's feet, his nose resting on his fore feet, and his
eyes, with great gravity, watching the motions of a skittish kitten
under the table. Opposite to him sat Tonson the gamekeeper--a thin,
wiry, beetle-browed fellow, with eyes like a ferret; and there were
also, one or two farmers, who lived in the village.

"Let's ha' another can o' ale, afore ye sit down," said Tonson, "we can
do with another half gallon, I'm thinking!" This order also was quickly
attended to; and then the landlord, having seen to the door, fastened
the shutters close, and stirred the crackling fire, took his place on a
vacant stool, and resumed his pipe.

"So she do take a very long grave, Jonas?" inquired Dickons of the
sexton, after some little pause.

"Ay, Mr. Dickons, a' think she do, t'ould girl! I always thought she
would--I used to measure her (as one may say) in my mind, whenever I saw
her! 'Tis a reg'lar _man's_ size, I warrant you; and when parson saw it,
a' said, he thought 'twere too big; but I axed his pardon, and said I
hadn't been sexton for thirty years without knowing my business--he,
he!"

"I suppose, Jonas, you mun ha' seen her walking about i' t' village, in
your time!--_Were_ she such a big-looking woman?" inquired Pumpkin, as
he shook the ashes out of his pipe, and replenished it.

"Forty year ago I did use to see her--she were then an old woman, wi'
white hair, and leaned on a stick--I never thought she'd a' lasted so
long," replied Higgs, emptying his glass.

"She've had a pretty long spell on't," quoth Dickons, after slowly
emptying his mouth of smoke.

"A hundred and two," replied the sexton; "so saith her coffin-plate--a'
see'd it to-day."

"What were her name?" inquired Tonson--"_I_ never knew her by any name
but Blind Bess."

"Her name be _Elizabeth Crabtree_ on the coffin," replied Higgs; "and
she be to be buried to-morrow."

"She were a strange old woman," said Hazel, one of the farmers, as he
took down one of the oatcakes hanging overhead; and breaking off a
piece, held it with the tongs before the fire to toast, and then put it
into his ale.

"Ay, she were," quoth Pumpkin; "I wonder what she thinks o' such things
_now_--maybe--God forgive me!--she's paying dear for her tricks!"

"Tut, Pumpkin," said Tonson, "let t'ould creature rest in her grave,
where she's going to, peaceably!"

"Ay, Master Tonson," quoth the clerk, in his reading-desk twang--"THERE
_be no knowledge_, _nor wisdom_, _nor device_!"

"'Tis very odd," observed Pumpkin, "but this dog that's lying at my feet
never could a' bear going past her cottage late o' nights--hang me if he
could; and the night she died--Lord! you should have heard the howl
Hector gave--and a' didn't then know she were gone--it's as true as the
gospel--it _is_--actually!"

"No! but were't _really_ so?" inquired Dickons--several of the others
taking their pipes out of their mouths, and looking earnestly at
Pumpkin.

"I didn't half like it, I can tell you," quoth Pumpkin.

"Ha, ha, ha!--ha, ha!" laughed the gamekeeper--

"Ay, marry, you may laugh," quoth Pumpkin, "but I'll stake half-a-gallon
o' ale you daren't go by yourself to the cottage where she's
lying--_now_, mind--i' the dark."

"_I'll_ do it," quoth Higgs, eagerly, preparing to lay down his pipe.

"No, no--_thou'rt_ quite used to dead folk--'tis quite in thy line!"
replied Pumpkin--and, after a little faint drollery, silence ensued for
some moments.

"Bess dropped off sudden like, at the last, didn't she?" inquired the
landlord.

"She went out, as, they say, like the snuff of a candle," replied
Jobbins, one of the farmers; "no one were with her but my Missis at the
time. The night afore, she had took to the rattles all of a sudden. My
Sall (that's _done for_ her, this long time, by Madam's orders,) says
old Bess were a good deal shaken by a chap from London, which cam' down
about a week afore Christmas."

"Ay, ay," quoth one, "I've heard o' that--what was it?--what passed
atwixt them?"

"Why, a' don't well know--but he seemed to know summat about t'ould
girl's connections, and he had a book, and wrote down something, and he
axed her, so Sall do tell me, such a many things about old people, and
things that are long gone by!"

"What were the use on't?" inquired Dickons; "for Bess hath been silly
this ten years, to my sartin knowledge."

"Why, a' couldn't tell. He seemed very 'quisitive, too, about t'ould
creature's Bible and prayer-book (she kept them in that ould bag of
hers)--and Sall said she had talked a good deal to the chap in her
mumbling way, and seemed to know some folk he asked her about. And Sall
saith she hath been, in a manner, dismal ever since, and often a-crying
and talking to herself."

"I've heard," said the landlord, "that squire and parson were wi' her on
Christmas-day--and that she talked a deal o' strange things, and that
the squire did seem, as it were, _struck_ a little, you know--struck,
like!"

"Why, so my Sall do say; but it may be all her own head," replied
Jobbins.

Here a pause took place.

"Madam," said the sexton, "hath given orders for an uncommon decent
burying to-morrow."

"Well, a' never thought any wrong of ould Bess, for my part," said
one--and another--and another; and they smoked their pipes for some
short time in silence.

"Talking o' strangers from London," said the sexton, presently--"who do
know anything o' them two chaps that were at church last Sunday? Two
such peacock chaps I never see'd afore in _my_ time--and grinning all
sarvice-time! the heathen!"

"Ay, I'll tell you something of 'em," said Hazel--a big broad-shouldered
farmer, who plucked his pipe out of his mouth with sudden
energy--"They're a brace o' good ones, to be sure, ha, ha! Some week or
ten days ago, as I were a-coming across the field leading into the lane
behind the church, I see'd these same two chaps, and on coming nearer,
(they not seeing me for the hedge,) Lord bless me! would you believe
it?--if they wasn't a-teasing my daughter Jenny, that were coming along
wi' some physic from the doctor for my old woman! One of 'em seemed
a-going to put his arm round her neck and t' other came close to her on
t' other side, a-talking to her and pushing her about." Here a young
farmer, who had but seldom spoken, took his pipe out of his mouth, and
exclaiming, "Lord bless me!" sat listening with his mouth wide open.
"Well," continued the former, "a' came into the road behind 'em, without
their seeing me; and"--(here he stretched out a thick, rigid, muscular
arm, and clinched his teeth)--"a' got hold of each by the collar, and
one of 'em I shook about, and gave him a kick i' the breech that sent
him spinning a yard or two on the road, he clapping his hand behind him,
and crying, to be sure--'You'll smart for this--a good hundred pound
damages!' or summat o' that sort. T' other dropped on his knees, and
begged for mercy; so a' just spit in his face, and flung him under
t' hedge, telling him if he stirred till I were out o' sight, I'd crack
his skull for him; and so I would!" Here the wrathful speaker pushed his
pipe again between his lips, and began puffing away with great energy;
while he who had appeared to take so great an interest in the story, and
who was the very man who had flown to the rescue of Miss Aubrey, when
she seemed on the point of being similarly treated, told that
circumstance exactly as it occurred, amid the silent but excited wonder
of those present--all of whom, at its close, uttered vehement
execrations, and intimated the summary and savage punishment which the
cowardly rascal would have experienced at the hands of each and every
one of them, had they come across him.

"I reckon," said the landlord, as soon as the swell had a little
subsided, "they must be the two chaps that put up here, some time ago,
for an hour or so. You should ha' seen 'em get on and off the
saddle--that's all! Why, a' laughed outright! The chap with the hair
under his chin got on upon the wrong side, and t'other seemed as if he
thought his beast would a' _bit_ him!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed all.

"I thought they'd a' both got a fall before they'd gone a dozen yards!"

"They've taken a strange fancy to my churchyard," said the sexton,
setting down his glass, and then preparing to fill his pipe again;
"they've been looking about among 'em--among t'ould gravestones, up
behind t'ould yew-tree yonder; and one of them writ something, now and
then, in a book; so they're book-writers, in coorse!"

"That's scholars, I reckon," quoth Dickons; "but rot the larning of such
chaps as them!"

"I wonder if they'll put a picture o' the Hall in their book," quoth the
sexton. "They axed a many questions about the people up there,
especially about the squire's father, and some ould folk, whose names I
knew when they spoke of 'em--but I hadn't heard o' them for this forty
year. And one of 'em (he were the shortest, and such a chap, to be
sure!--just like the monkey that were dressed i' man's clothes, last
Grilston fair) talked uncommon fine about young _Miss_"----

"If _I'd_ a' heard him tak' her name into his dirty mouth, his teeth
should a' gone after it!" said Tonson.

"Lord! he didn't say any harm--only silly like--and t' other seemed now
and then not to like his going on so. The little one said Miss were a
lovely gal, or something like that--and hoped they'd become by-and-by
better friends--ah, ha!"

"What! wi' that chap?" said Pumpkin--and he looked as if he were
meditating putting the little sexton up the chimney, for the mere naming
of such a thing.

"I reckon they're fro' London, and brought toon tricks wi' 'em--for I
never heard o' such goings on as theirs down _here_ afore," said Tonson.

"One of 'em--him that axed me all the questions, and wrote i' t' book,
seemed a sharp enough chap in his way; but I can't say much for the
little one," said Higgs. "Lud, I couldn't hardly look in his face for
laughing, he seemed such a fool!--He had a riding-whip wi' a silver
head, and stood smacking his legs (you should ha' seen how tight his
clothes was on his legs--I warrant you, Tim Timpkins never see'd such a
thing, I'll be sworn) all the while, as if a' liked to hear the sound of
it."

"If I'd a' been beside him," said Hazel, "I'd a' saved him that
trouble--only I'd a' laid it into _another_ part of him!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" they laughed--and presently passed on to other matters.

"Hath the squire been doing much lately in Parliament?" inquired the
sexton, of Dickons.

"Why, yes--he's trying hard to get that new road made from Harkley
bridge to Hilton."

"Ah, that would save a good four mile, if a' could manage it!" said one
of the farmers.

"I hear the Papists are trying to get the upper hand again--which the
Lud forbid!" said the sexton, after another pause.

"The squire hath lately made a speech in that matter, that hath finished
them," said Dickons, in a grave and authoritative tone.

"What would they be after?" inquired the landlord of Dickons, of whom,
in common with all present, he thought great things. "They _say_ they
wants nothing but what's their own, and liberty, and that like"----

"If thou wert a shepherd, Master Higgs," replied Dickons, "and wert to
be asked by ten or a dozen wolves to let them in among thy flock of
sheep, they saying how quiet and kind they would be to 'em--would'st let
'em in, or keep 'em out?--eh?"

"Ay, ay--that be it--'tis as true as gospel!" said the clerk.

"So you a'n't to have that old sycamore down, after all, Master
Dickons?" inquired Tonson, after a pause in the conversation.

"No; Miss hath carried the day against the squire and Mr. Waters; and
there stands the old tree, and it hath to be looked to better than ever
it were afore!"

"Why hath Miss taken such a fancy to it? 'Tis an old crazy thing!"

"If thou hadst been there when she did beg, as I may say, its life,"
replied Dickons, with a little energy--"and hadst seen her, and heard
her voice, that be as smooth as cream, thou would'st never have
forgotten it, I can tell thee!"

"There isn't a more beautiful lady i' t' county, I reckon, than the
squire's sister?" inquired the sexton.

"No, nor in all England: if there be, I'll lay down twenty pounds!"

"And where's to be found a young lady that do go about i' t' village
like she?--She were wi' Phœbe Williams t'other night, all through the
snow, and i' t' dark."

"If I'd only laid hands on that chap!" interrupted the young farmer, her
rescuer.

"I wonder she do not choose some one to be married to, up in London,"
said the landlord.

"She'll be having some delicate high quality chap, I reckon, one o'
these fine days," said Hazel.

"She will be a dainty dish, truly, for whomever God gives her to," quoth
Dickons.

"Ay, she will," said more than one, in an earnest tone.

"Now, to my mind," said Tonson, "saving your presence, Master Dickons, I
know not but young Madam be more to my taste; she be in a manner
somewhat fuller--plumper-like, and her skin be _so_ white, and her hair
as black as a raven's."

"There's not another two such women to be found in the whole world,"
said Dickons, authoritatively. Here Hector suddenly rose up, and went to
the door, where he stood snuffing in an inquisitive manner.

"Now, what do that dog hear, I wonder?" quoth Pumpkin, curiously,
stooping forward.

"Blind Bess," replied Tonson, winking his eye, and laughing. Presently
there was a sharp rapping at the door; which the landlord opened, and
let in one of the servants from the Hall, his clothes white with snow,
his face nearly as white, with manifest agitation.

"Why, man, what's the matter?" inquired Dickons, startled by the man's
appearance. "Art frightened at anything?"

"Oh, Lord! oh, Lord!" he commenced.

"What is it, man? Art drunk?--or mad?--or frightened? Take a drop o'
drink," said Tonson. But the man refused it.

"Oh, Lord!--There's woful work at the Hall!"

"What's the matter?" cried all at once, rising and standing round the
new-comer.

"If thou be'st drunk, John," said Dickons, sternly, "there's a way of
sobering thee--mind that."

"Oh, Master Dickons, I don't know what's come to me, for grief and
fright! The squire, they do say, and all of us, are to be turned out o'
Yatton!"

"_What!_" exclaimed all in a breath.

"There's some one else lays claim to it. We must all go! Oh, Lud! oh,
Lud!" No one spoke for a while; and consternation was written on every
face.

"Sit thee down here, John," said Dickons at length, "and let us hear
what thou hast to say--or thou wilt have us all be going up in a body to
the Hall."

Having forced on him part of a glass of ale, he began,--"There hath been
plainly mischief brewing, _somewhere_, this many days, as I could tell
by the troubled face o' t' squire; but he kept it to himself. Lawyer
Parkinson and another have been latterly coming in chaises from London;
and last night the squire got a letter that seems to have finished all.
Such trouble there were last night wi' t' squire, and young Madam and
Miss! And to-day the parson came, and were a long while alone with old
Madam, who hath since had a stroke, or a fit, or something of that like,
(the doctors have been there all day from Grilston,) and likewise young
Madam hath taken to her bed, and is ill. Oh, Lud! oh, Lud! Such work
there be going on!"

"And what of the squire and Miss?" inquired some one, after all had
maintained a long silence.

"Oh, 't would break your heart to see them," said the man, dolefully:
"they be both pale as death: he so dreadful sorrowful, but quiet, like,
and she now and then wringing her hands, and both of them going from the
bedroom of old Madam to young Madam's. Nay, an' there had been half a
dozen deaths i' t' house, it could not be worse. Neither the squire or
Miss hath touched food the whole day!"

There was, in truth, not a dry eye in the room, nor one whose voice did
not seem somewhat obstructed with his emotions.

"Who _told_ thee all this about the squire's losing the estate?"
inquired Dickons, with mingled trepidation and sternness.

"We heard of it but an hour or so agone. Mr. Parkinson (it seems by the
squire's orders) told Mr. Waters, and he told it to us; saying as how it
was useless to keep such a thing secret, and that we might as well all
know the occasion of so much trouble."

"Who's to ha' it then, instead of the squire?" at length inquired
Tonson, in a voice half choked with rage and grief.

"Lord only knows at present. But whoever 'tis, there isn't one of us
sarvents but will go with the squire and his--if it be even to prison,
_that_ I can tell ye!"

"I'm Squire _Aubrey's_ gamekeeper," quoth Tonson, his eye kindling as
his countenance darkened, "and no one's else! It shall go hard if any
one else here hath a game"--

"But if there's law in the land, sure the justice must be wi'
t' squire--he and his family have had it so long?" said one of the
farmers.

"I'll tell you what, masters," said Pumpkin, mysteriously, "I shall be
somewhat better pleased when Jonas here hath got that old creature Bess
safe underground!"

"Blind Bess?" exclaimed Tonson, with a very serious, not to say
disturbed, countenance. "I wonder--sure! sure! _that_ ould witch can
have had no hand in all this---- eh?"----

"Poor old soul, not she! There be no such things as witches
now-a-days," exclaimed Jonas. "Not she, I warrant me! She hath been ever
befriended by the squire's family. _She_ do it!"

"The sooner we get that old woman underground, for all that, the better,
say I!" quoth Tonson, significantly.

"The parson hath a choice sermon on 'The Flying away of Riches,'" said
Higgs, in a quaint, sad manner; "'tis to be hoped that he'll preach from
it next Sunday!"----

Soon after this, the little party dispersed, each oppressed with greater
grief and amazement than he had ever known before. Bad news flies
swiftly--and that which had just come from the Hall, within a very few
hours of its having been told at the Aubrey Arms, had spread grief and
consternation among high and low for many miles round Yatton.




CHAPTER X.


Would you have believed it? Notwithstanding all that had happened
between Titmouse and Tag-rag, they positively got reconciled to one
another--a triumphant result of the astute policy of Mr. Gammon. As soon
as he had heard Titmouse's infuriated account of his ignominious
expulsion from Satin Lodge, he burst into a fit of hearty but gentle
laughter, which at length subsided into an inward chuckle which lasted
the rest of the day; and was occasioned, first, by gratification at the
impression which his own sagacity had evidently produced upon the
powerful mind of Titmouse; secondly, by an exquisite appreciation of the
mingled meanness and stupidity of Tag-rag. I do not mean it to be
understood, that Titmouse had given Mr. Gammon such a terse and clear
account of the matter as I imagine myself to have given to the reader;
but still he told quite enough to put Mr. Gammon in full possession of
the true state of the case. Good: but then--instantly reflected
Gammon--what are we now to do with Titmouse?--where was that troublesome
little ape to be caged, till it suited the purposes of his proprietors
(as Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap might surely be called, for they had
caught him, however they might fail to tame him) to let him loose upon
society, to amuse and astonish it by his antics?--That was the question
occupying the thoughts of Mr. Gammon, while his calm, clear, gray eye
was fixed upon Titmouse, apparently very attentive to what he was
saying. That gentleman had first told the story of his wrongs to Snap,
who instantly, rubbing his hands, suggested an indictment at the
Clerkenwell sessions--an idea which infinitely delighted Titmouse, but
was somewhat sternly "pooh-poohed!" by Mr. Gammon as soon as he heard of
it,--Snap thereat shrugging his shoulders with a disconcerted air, but a
bitter sneer upon his sharp, hard face. Like many men of little but
active minds, early drilled to particular and petty callings, Snap was
equal to the mechanical conduct of business--the mere working of the
machinery--but, as the phrase is, could never see an inch beyond his
nose. Every little conjuncture of circumstances which admitted of
litigation, at once suggested its _expediency_, without reference to
other considerations, or connection with, or subordination to, any
general purpose or plan of action. A creature of small impulses, he had
no idea of foregoing a momentary advantage to secure an ulterior object
of importance--which, in fact, he could not keep for a moment before his
thoughts, so as to have any influence on his movements. What a different
man, now, was Gammon!

To speak after the manner of physiologists, several of my
characters--Titmouse, Tag-rag, (with his amiable wife and daughter,)
Huckaback, Snap, and old Quirk himself--may be looked on as reptiles of
a low order in the scale of being, whose simple structures almost one
dash of the knife would suffice to lay thoroughly open. Gammon, however,
I look upon as of a much higher order; possessing a far more complicated
structure, adapted to the discharge of superior functions; and who,
consequently, requireth a more careful dissection. But let it not be
supposed that I have yet done with _any_ of my characters.

Gammon saw that Tag-rag, under proper management, might be made very
useful. He was a _moneyed man_; a selfish man; and, after his sort, an
ambitious man. He had an only child, a daughter, and if Titmouse and he
could only be by any means once more brought together, and a firm
friendship cemented between them, Gammon saw several very profitable
uses to which such an intimacy might be turned, in the happening of any
of several contemplated contingencies. In the event, for instance, of
larger outlays of money being required than suited the convenience of
the firm--could not Tag-rag be easily brought to accommodate his future
son-in-law of £10,000 a-year? Suppose that, after all, their case should
break down and all their pains, exertions, and expenditure be utterly
thrown away! Now, if Tag-rag could be quietly brought, some fine day, to
the point of either making an actual advance, or becoming security for
Titmouse--ah! that would do--- that _would_ do, said both Quirk and
Gammon. But then Titmouse was a very unsafe instrument--an incalculable
fool, and might commit himself too far!

"You forget, Gammon," said old Mr. Quirk, "I don't fear this girl of
Tag-rag's--because only let Titmouse see--hem," he suddenly paused, and
looked a little confused.

"To be sure--I see," replied Gammon, quietly, and the thing passed off.
"If either Miss Quirk or Miss Tag-rag becomes Mrs. Titmouse," thought
he, "I am not the man I take myself for."

A few days after Titmouse's expulsion from Satin Lodge, without his
having ever gone near Tag-rag's premises in Oxford Street, or in short,
seen or heard anything about him, or any one connected with him,
Titmouse removed to small but very respectable lodgings in the
neighborhood of Hatton Garden, provided for him by Mr. Quirk. Mrs.
Squallop was quite affected while she took leave of Titmouse, who gave
her son a penny to take his two boxes down-stairs to the hackney-coach
drawn up opposite to the entrance of Closet Court.

"I've always felt like a mother towards you, sir, in my humble way,"
said Mrs. Squallop, in a very respectful manner, and courtesying
profoundly.

"A--I've not got any--a--change by me, my good woman," said Titmouse,
with a fine air, as he drew on his white kid glove.

"Lord, Mr. Titmouse!" said the woman, almost bursting into tears, "I
wasn't asking for money, neither for me nor mine--only one can't help,
as it were, feeling at parting with an old lodger, you know, sir"--

"Ah--ya--as--and all that! Well, my good woman, good-day, good-day!"
quoth Titmouse, with an air of languid indifference.

"Good-by, sir--God bless you, sir, now you're going to be a rich
man!--Excuse me, sir."--And she seized his hand and shook it.

"You're a--devilish--impudent--woman--'pon my soul!" exclaimed Titmouse,
his features filled with amazement at the presumption of which she had
been guilty; and he strode down the stairs with an air of offended
dignity.

"Well--I never!--_That_ for you, you little brute," exclaimed Mrs.
Squallop, snapping her fingers as soon as she had heard his last step on
the stairs--"Kind or cruel, it's all one to you!--You're a nasty
jackanapes, only fit to stand in a tailor's window to show his
clothes--and I'll be sworn you'll come to no good in the end, please
God! Let you be _rich_ as you may, you'll always be the fool you always
was!"

Had the good woman been familiar with the Night Thoughts of Dr. Young,
she might have expressed herself somewhat tersely in a line of his--

    "Pygmies are pygmies still, though perched on Alps."

And, by the way, who can read the next line--

    "And pyramids are pyramids in vales,"

without thinking for a moment, with a kind of proud sympathy, of certain
_other_ characters in this history? Well! but let us pass on.

The day after that on which Mr. Gammon had had a long interview with
Titmouse, at the new lodgings of the latter,--when, after a very skilful
effort, he had succeeded in reconciling Titmouse to a renewal of his
acquaintance with Tag-rag, upon that gentleman's making a complete and
abject apology for his late monstrous conduct,--Mr. Gammon wended his
way towards Oxford Street, and soon introduced himself once more to Mr.
Tag-rag, who was standing leaning against one of the counters in his
shop in a musing position, with a pen behind his ear, and his hands in
his breeches' pockets. Ten days had elapsed since he had expelled the
little impostor Titmouse from Satin Lodge, and during that interval he
had neither seen nor heard anything whatever of him. On now catching the
first glimpse of Mr. Gammon, he started from his musing posture, not a
little disconcerted, and agitation overspread his coarse deeply-pitted
face with a tallowy hue. What was in the wind? Mr. Gammon coming to him,
so long after what had occurred! Mr. Gammon who, having found out his
error, had discarded Titmouse! Tag-rag had a mortal dread of Gammon, who
seemed to him to glide like a dangerous snake into the shop, so quietly,
and _so deadly_! There was something so calm and imperturbable in his
demeanor, so blandly crafty, so ominously gentle and soft in the tone of
his voice, so penetrating in his eye, and he could throw such an
infernal smile over his features! Tag-rag might be likened to the
animal, suddenly shuddering as he perceives the glistening folds of the
rattlesnake noiselessly moving towards, or around him, in the long
grass. One glimpse of his blasting beauty of hue, and--Horror! all is
over.

If the splendid bubble of Titmouse's fortune _had_ burst in the manner
which he had represented, why Gammon here now? thought Tag-rag. It was
with, in truth, a very poor show of contempt and defiance, that, in
answer to the bland salutation of Gammon, Tag-rag led the way down the
shop into the little room which had been the scene of such an
extraordinary communication concerning Titmouse on a former occasion.

Gammon commenced, in a mild tone, with a very startling representation
of the criminal liability which Tag-rag had incurred by his wanton
outrage upon Mr. Titmouse; his own guest, in violation of all the laws
of hospitality. Tag-rag furiously alleged the imposition which had been
practised on him by Titmouse; but seemed quite collapsed when Gammon
assured him that that circumstance would not afford him the slightest
justification. Having satisfied Tag-rag that he was entirely at the
mercy of Titmouse, who might subject him to both fine and imprisonment,
Mr. Gammon proceeded to open his eyes to their widest stare of
amazement, by assuring him that Titmouse had been hoaxing him, and that
he was really in the dazzling position in which he had been first
represented by Gammon to Tag-rag; that every week brought him nearer to
the full and uncontrolled enjoyment of an estate in Yorkshire, worth
£10,000 a-year at the very lowest; that it was becoming an object of
increasing anxiety to them (Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap) to keep him
out of the hands of money-lenders, who, as usual in such cases, had
already scented out their victim, and so forth. Tag-rag turned very
white, and felt sick at heart in the midst of all his wonder. Oh, and
his daughter had lost the golden prize! and through _his_ misconduct! He
could have sunk into the cellar!--Mr. Gammon declared that he could not
account for the singular conduct of Mr. Titmouse on the melancholy
occasion in question, except by referring it to the excellent wines
which he had too freely partaken of at Satin Lodge, added (said Gammon,
with an exquisite expression of features which perfectly fascinated
Tag-rag) to a "certain tenderer influence" which had fairly laid
prostrate the faculties of the young and enthusiastic Titmouse; that
there could be no doubt of his real motive in the conduct alluded to,
namely, a desire to test the sincerity and disinterestedness of a
"certain person's" attachment before he let all his fond and passionate
feelings go out towards her--[At this point the perspiration burst from
every pore in the devoted body of Tag-rag]--and that no one could
deplore the unexpected issue of his little experiment so much as now did
Titmouse.

Tag-rag really, for a moment, scarcely knew where he was, who was with
him, nor whether he stood on his head or his heels, so delightful and
entirely unexpected was the issue of Mr. Gammon's visit. As soon as his
faculties had somewhat recovered themselves from their temporary
confusion, almost breathless, he assured Gammon that no event in the
whole course of his life had occasioned him such poignant regret as his
treatment of Titmouse on the occasion in question; that he had
undoubtedly followed unwittingly (he was ashamed to own) the example of
Titmouse, and drank far more than his usual quantity of wine; besides
which he had undoubtedly noticed, as had Mrs. T., the state of things
between Mr. Titmouse and his daughter--talking of whom, by the way, he
could assure Mr. Gammon that both Mrs. and Miss T. had been ill ever
since that unfortunate evening, and had never ceased to condemn
his--Tag-rag's--monstrous conduct on that occasion. As for Miss T., she
was growing thinner and thinner every day, and he thought he must send
her to the country for a short time: in fact--poor girl!--she was
plainly pining away!

To all this Mr. Gammon listened with a calm, delightful, sympathizing
look, which quite transported Tag-rag, and satisfied him that Mr. Gammon
implicitly believed every word that was being said to him. But when he
proceeded to assure Tag-rag that this visit of his had been undertaken
at the earnest instance of Mr. Titmouse himself, (who, by the way, had
removed to lodgings which would do for the present, so as they were only
near to their office, for the purpose of frequent communication on
matters of business between him and their firm,) who had urged Mr.
Gammon to tender the olive branch, in the devout hope that it might be
accepted--Tag-rag's excitement knew scarce any bounds; and he could
almost have started into the shop, and given orders to his shopmen to
shut up shop half an hour earlier for the rest of the week! Mr. Gammon
wrote down Titmouse's direction, and handing it to Mr. Tag-rag, assured
him that a call from him would be gratefully received by Mr. Titmouse.
"There's no accounting for these things, Mr. Tag-rag--is there?" said
Mr. Gammon, with an arch smile, as he prepared to depart--Tag-rag
squeezing his hands with painful energy as Gammon bade him adieu,
declaring that "he should not be himself for the rest of the day" and
bowing the aforesaid Mr. Gammon down the shop with as profound an
obsequiousness as if he had been the Lord High Chancellor, or even the
Lord Mayor. As soon as Gammon had got fairly into the street, and to a
safe distance, he burst into little gentle paroxysms of laughter, every
now and then, which lasted him till he had regained his office in
Saffron Hill.

The motive so boldly and skilfully suggested by Gammon to Tag-rag, as
that impelling Titmouse to seek a reconciliation with him, was greedily
credited by Tag-rag. 'Tis certainly very easy for a man to believe what
he wishes to be true. Was it _very_ improbable that Tag-rag, loving only
one object on earth, (next to money, which indeed he really did love
with the best and holiest energies of his nature,) namely, his daughter;
and believing her to be possessed of qualities calculated to excite
every one's love--should believe that she had inspired Titmouse with the
passion of which he had just been hearing--a passion which was consuming
him--which could not be quenched by even the gross outrage which---- but
faugh! _that_ Tag-rag shuddered to think of. He clapped his hat on his
head, and started off to Titmouse's lodgings, and fortunately caught
that gentleman just as he was going out to dine at a neighboring tavern.
If Tag-rag had been a keen observer, he could hardly have failed to
discover aversion towards himself written in every feature and gesture
of Titmouse; and also the difficulty which he experienced in concealing
his feelings. But his eagerness overbore everything; and took Titmouse
quite by storm. Before Tag-rag had done with him, he had obliterated
every trace of resentment in his little friend's bosom. Thoroughly as
Gammon thought he had armed Titmouse against the encounter--indeed, at
all points--'twas of no avail. Tag-rag poured such a monstrous quantity
of flummery down the gaping mouth and insatiate throat of the little
animal, as at length produced its desired effect. Few can resist
flattery, however coarsely administered; but as for Titmouse, he felt
the delicious fluid softly insinuating itself into every crevice of his
little nature, for which it seemed, indeed, to have a peculiar affinity;
'twas a balm, 'twas an opiate soothing his wounded pride, lubricating
all his inner man; nay, flooding it, so as at length to extinguish
entirely the very small glimmering spark of discernment which nature had
lit in him. "To be fore_warned_, is to be fore_armed_," says the
proverb; but it was not verified in the present instance. Titmouse would
have dined at Satin Lodge on the very next Sunday, in accordance with
the pressing invitations of Tag-rag, but that he happened to recollect
having engaged himself to dine on that evening with Mr. Quirk, at his
residence in Camberwell--ALIBI HOUSE. As I have already intimated in a
previous part of this history, that most respectable old gentleman, Mr.
Quirk, with the shrewdness natural to him, and which had been quickened
by his great experience, had soon seen through the ill-contrived and
worse-concealed designs upon Titmouse of Mr. Tag-rag; and justly
considered that the surest method of rendering them abortive would be to
familiarize Titmouse with a superior style of things, such as was to be
found at Alibi House--and a more lovely and attractive object for his
best affections in Miss Quirk--Dora Quirk--the lustre of whose charms
and accomplishments there could be no doubt, he thought, would instantly
efface the image of that poor, feeble, vulgar creature, Miss Tag-rag;
for such old Quirk knew her to be, though he had, in fact, never for a
moment set eyes upon her. Mr. Tag-rag looked rather blank at hearing of
the grand party there was to be at Alibi House, and that Titmouse was to
be introduced to the only daughter of Mr. Quirk, and could not for the
life of him abstain from dropping something, vague and indistinct to be
sure, about "entrapping unsuspecting innocence," and "interested
attentions," and other similar expressions--all of which, however, were
lost upon Titmouse. Tapping with an auctioneer's hammer on a block of
granite, would make about as much impression upon it as will hint,
innuendo, or suggestion, upon a blockhead. So it was with Titmouse. He
promised to dine at Satin Lodge on the Sunday after the ensuing
one--with which poor Mr. Tag-rag was obliged to depart content; having
been unable to get Titmouse up to Clapham on either of the intervening
evenings, on which, he told Mr. Tag-rag, he was particularly engaged
with an intimate friend--"in fact, one of HIS SOLICITORS;" and Tag-rag
left him after shaking him by the hand with the utmost cordiality and
energy. He instantly conceived a lively hatred of old Mr. Quirk and his
daughter, who seemed taking so unfair an advantage. What, however, could
be done? Many times during his interview did he anxiously turn about in
his mind the expediency of proffering to lend or give Titmouse a
five-pound note, of which he had one or two in his pocket-book; but
no--'twas too much for human nature--he _could_ not bring himself to it;
and quitted Titmouse as rich a man as he had entered that gentleman's
lodgings.

The "intimate friend" to whom Titmouse alluded as having engaged himself
to dinner with him, was, in fact, Mr. Snap; who had early evinced a
great partiality for him, and lost no opportunity of contributing to his
enjoyment. Snap was a sharp-sighted person, and quickly detected many
qualities in Titmouse, kindred to his own. He sincerely commiserated
Titmouse's situation, than which, could anything be more lonely and
desolate? Was he to sit night after night in the lengthening nights of
autumn and winter, with not a soul to speak to, not a book to read,
(that was at least interesting or worth reading;) nothing, in short, to
occupy his attention? "No," said Snap to himself; "I will do as I would
be done by; I will come and draw him out of his dull hole; I will show
him life--I will give him an early insight into the habits and practices
of the great world, in which he is so soon to cut a leading figure! I
will early familiarize him with the gayest and most exciting modes of
London life!" The very first taste of this cup of pleasure was
exquisitely relished by Titmouse; and he felt a proportionate gratitude
to him whose kind hand had first raised it to his lips. Scenes of which
he had heretofore only heard and read--after which he had often sighed
and yearned, were now opening daily before him, limited as were his
means; and he felt perfectly happy. When Snap had finished the day's
labors of the office, from which he was generally released about eight
or nine o'clock in the evening, he would repair to his lodgings, and
decorate himself for the night's display; after which, either he would
go to Titmouse, or Titmouse come to him, as might have been previously
agreed upon between them; and then,--

    "The _town_ was all before them, where to choose!"

Sometimes they would, arm in arm, each with his cigar in his mouth,
saunter, for hours together, along the leading streets and
thoroughfares, making acute observations and deep reflections upon the
ever-moving and motley scenes around them. Most frequently, however,
they would repair, at half-price, to the theatres; for Snap had the
means of securing almost a constant supply of "orders" from the
underlings of the theatres, and also from reporters to the _Sunday
Flash_, (with which Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were connected,) and other
newspapers. Ah, 'twas a glorious sight to see these two gentlemen
saunter into a vacant box, conscious that the eyes of two-thirds of the
house were fixed upon them in admiration, and conducting themselves
accordingly--as swells of the first water! One such night
counterbalanced, in Titmouse's estimation, a whole year of his previous
obscurity and wretchedness! The theatre over, they would repair to some
cloudy tavern, full of noise and smoke, and the glare of
gaslight--redolent of the fragrant fumes of tobacco, gin, and porter,
intermingled with the tempting odors of smoking kidneys, mutton-chops,
beefsteaks, oysters, stewed cheese, toasted cheese, Welsh rabbits; where
those who are chained to the desk and the counter during the day, revel
in the license of the hour, and eat, and drink, and smoke to the highest
point either of excitement or stupefaction, and enter into all the
slang of the day--of the turf, the ring, the cockpit, the theatres--and
shake their sides at comic songs. To enter one of these places when the
theatre was over, was a luxury indeed to Titmouse; figged out in his
very uttermost best, with satin stock and double breastpins; his glossy
hat cocked on one side of his head, his tight blue surtout, with the
snowy handkerchief elegantly drooping out of the breast-pocket;
straw-colored kid gloves, tight trousers, and shining boots; his ebony
silver-headed cane held carelessly under his arm! To walk into the
middle of the room with a sort of haughty ease and indifference, or
nonchalance; and after deliberately scanning, through his eye-glass,
every box, with its occupants, at length drop into a vacant nook, and
with a languid air summon the bustling waiter to receive his commands,
was ecstasy! The circumstance of his almost always accompanying Snap on
these occasions, who was held in great awe by the waiters, to whom his
professional celebrity was well known, (for there was scarce an
interesting, a dreadful, or a nasty scene at any of the police-offices,
in which Snap's name did not figure in the newspapers as "appearing on
behalf of the prisoner,") got Titmouse almost an equal share of
consideration, and aided the effect produced by his own commanding
appearance. As for Snap, whenever he was asked who his companion was, he
would whisper in a very significant tone and manner--"Devilish high
chap!" From these places they would repair, not unfrequently, to certain
other scenes of nightly London life, which, I thank God! the virtuous
reader can form no notion of, though they are, strange to say, winked
at, if not patronized by the police and magistracy, till the metropolis
is choked with them. Thus would Snap and Titmouse pleasantly pass away
their time till one, two, three, and often four o'clock in the morning;
at which hours they would, with many yawns, skulk homewards through the
deserted and silent streets, their clothes redolent of tobacco smoke,
their stomachs overcharged, their heads often muddled, swimming, and
throbbing with their multifarious potations--having thus spent a "_jolly
night_," and "_seen life_." 'T was thus that Snap greatly endeared
himself to Titmouse, and secretly (for he enjoined upon Titmouse, as the
condition of their continuance, strict secrecy on the subject of these
nocturnal adventures) stole a march upon his older competitors for the
good opinion of Titmouse--Messrs. Quirk, Tag-rag, and even the astute
and experienced Gammon himself. Such doings as these required, however,
as may easily be believed, some slight augmentations of the allowance
made to Titmouse by Messrs. Quirk and Gammon; and it was fortunate that
Snap was in a condition, having a few hundreds at his command, to supply
the necessities of Titmouse, receiving with a careless air, on the
occasion of such advances, small slips of paper by way of
acknowledgments; some on stamped paper, others on unstamped
paper,--promissory notes, and I. O. U's. Inasmuch, however, as Snap was
not always possessed of a stamp on the occasion of a sudden advance, and
having asked the opinion of his pleader (a sharp fellow who had been
articled at the same time as himself to Messrs. Quirk and Gammon) as to
whether an instrument in this form, "I. O. U. so much--_with interest_,"
would be available without a stamp, and being informed that it was a
very doubtful point, Snap ingeniously met the difficulty by quietly
adding to the principal what might become due in respect of interest:
_e. g._ if £5 were lent, the acknowledgment would stand for £15--these
little slips of paper being generally signed by Titmouse in moments of
extreme exhilaration, when he never thought of scrutinizing anything
that his friend Snap would lay before him. For the honor of Snap, I
must say that I hardly think he deliberately purposed to perpetuate the
fraud which such a transaction appears to amount to; all he wanted
was--so he satisfied himself at least--to have it in his power to
recover the full amount of principal _really_ advanced, with interest,
on one or other of these various securities, and hold the surplus as
trustee for Titmouse. If, for instance, any unfortunate difference
should hereafter arise between himself and Titmouse, and he should
refuse to recognize his pecuniary obligations to Snap, the latter
gentleman would be provided with short and easy proofs of his demands
against him. 'T was thus, I say, that Snap rendered himself
indispensable to Titmouse, whom he bound to him by every tie of
gratitude; so that, in short, they became sworn friends.

I will always say for Gammon, that, whatever might have been his motive,
he strenuously endeavored to urge upon Titmouse the necessity of
acquiring, at all events, a smattering of the elements of useful
education. Beyond an acquaintance with the petty operations of
arithmetic requisite for counter-transactions, I will venture to say
that poor Titmouse had no serviceable knowledge of any kind. Mr. Gammon
repeatedly pressed him to put himself under competent teachers of the
ordinary branches of education; but Titmouse as often evaded him, and at
length flatly refused to do anything of the kind. He promised, however,
to read such books as Mr. Gammon might recommend; who thereupon sent him
several: but a book before Titmouse was much the same as a plate of
sawdust before a hungry man. Mr. Gammon, himself a man of considerable
acquirements, soon saw the true state of the case, and gave up his
attempts in despair and disgust. Not that he ever suffered Titmouse to
perceive the faintest indication of such feelings towards him; on the
contrary, Gammon ever exhibited the same bland and benignant demeanor,
consulting his wishes in everything, and striving to instil into him
feelings of love, tempered by respect, as towards the most powerful--the
only real, disinterested friend he had! To a very great extent he
succeeded.

Titmouse spent several hours in preparing for an effective first
appearance at the dinner-table at Alibi House. Since dining at Satin
Lodge, he had considerably increased his wardrobe both in quantity and
style. He now sported a pair of tight black trousers, with pumps and
gossamer silk stockings. He wore a crimson velvet waistcoat, with a
bright blue satin under-waistcoat, a shirt-frill standing out somewhat
fiercely at right angles with his breast, and a brown dress-coat cut in
the extreme of the fashion, the long tails coming to a point just about
the backs of his knees. His hair (its purple hue still pretty distinctly
perceptible) was disposed with great elegance. He had discarded
mustaches; but had a very promising imperial. The hair underneath his
chin came out curling on each side of it, above his stock, like two
little tufts or horns. Over his waistcoat he wore his mosaic gold
watch-guard, and a broad black watered ribbon, to which was attached his
eye-glass--in fact, if he had dressed himself in order to sit to a
miniature painter for his likeness, he could not have taken greater
pains, or secured a more successful result. The only points about his
appearance with which he was at all dissatisfied, were his hair--which
was not yet the thing which he hoped in due time to see it--his thick
red stumpy hands, and his round shoulders. The last matter gave him
considerable concern, for he felt that it seriously interfered with a
graceful carriage; and that the defect in his figure had been, after
all, not in the least remedied by the prodigious padding of his coat.
His protuberant eyes, of very light hue, had an expression entirely
harmonizing with that of his open mouth; and both together, quite
independently of his dress, carriage, and demeanor--(there is nothing
like being candid)--gave you the image of a--complete fool. Having at
length carefully adjusted his hat on his head, and drawn on his white
kid gloves, he enveloped himself in a stylish cloak, with long black
silk tassels, which had been lent to him by Snap; and about four
o'clock, forth sallied Mr. Titmouse, carefully picking his way, in quest
of the first coach that could convey him to Alibi House, or as near to
it as might be. He soon found one, and, conscious that his appearance
was far too splendid for an outside place, got inside. All the way
along, his heart was in a little flutter of vanity, excitement, and
expectation. He was going to be introduced to Miss Quirk--and probably,
also, to several people of great consequence--as the heir apparent to
£10,000 a-year! Two very respectable female passengers, his companions,
he never once deigned to interchange, a syllable with. Four or five
times did he put his head out of the window, calling out in a loud
peremptory tone--"Mind, coachman--Alibi House--Mr. Quirk's--Alibi
House--Do you hear, demme?" After which he would sink back into the seat
with a magnificent air, as if he had not been used to give himself so
much trouble. The coach at length stopped. "Hallibi Ouse, sir," said the
coachman, in a most respectful tone--"this is Mr. Quirk's, sir."
Titmouse stepped out, dropped eighteenpence into the man's hand, and
opening the gate, found himself in a straight and narrow gravel walk, of
about twenty yards in length, with little obstinate-looking stunted
shrubs on each side. 'T was generally known, among Mr. Quirk's friends,
by the name of "the _Rope-walk_." Titmouse might have entered before as
fine-looking a house, but only to deliver a bundle of drapery or
hosiery: never before had he entered such an one in the reality of
guest. It was, in fact, a fair-sized house, at least treble that of
Satin Lodge, and had a far more stylish appearance. When Titmouse pulled
the bell, the door was quickly plucked open by a big footman, with showy
shoulder-knot and a pair of splendid red plush breeches, who soon
disposed of Titmouse's cloak and hat, and led the way to the
drawing-room, before our friend, with a sudden palpitation of the heart,
had had a moment's time even to run his hands through his hair.

"Your name, sir?" inquired the man, suddenly pausing--with his hand upon
the handle of the door.

"Mr. Titmouse!"

"I--_beg_ your pardon, sir; _what_ name?"

Titmouse clearing his throat repeated his name--open went the door,
and--"Mr. Ticklemouse," said the servant, very loudly and
distinctly--ushering in Titmouse; on whom the door was the next instant
closed. He felt amazingly flustered--and he would have been still more
so, if he could have been made aware of the titter which pervaded the
fourteen or twenty people assembled in the room, occasioned by the droll
misnomer of the servant, and the exquisitely ridiculous appearance of
poor Titmouse. Mr. Quirk, dressed in black, with knee breeches and silk
stockings, immediately bustled up to him, shook him cordially by the
hand, and led him up to the assembled guests. "My daughter--Miss Quirk;
Mrs. Alderman Addlehead; Mrs. Deputy Diddle-daddle; Mrs. Alias, my
sister;--Mr. Alderman Addlehead; Mr. Deputy Diddle-daddle; Mr. Bluster;
Mr. Slang; Mr. Hug; Mr. Flaw; Mr. Viper; Mr. Ghastly; Mr. Gammon you
know." Miss Quirk was about four or five and twenty--a fat young lady,
with flaxen hair curled formally all over her head and down to her
shoulders; so that she very much resembled one of those great wax dolls
seen in bazaars and shop windows. Her complexion was beautifully fair;
her eyes were small; her face was quite round and fat. From the
die-away manner in which she moved her head, and the languid tone of her
voice, it was obvious that she was a very sentimental young lady. She
was dressed in white, and wore a massive gold chain--her fat arms being
half covered with long kid gloves. She was sitting on the sofa, from
which she did not rise when Titmouse was introduced to her--and the
moment afterwards, hid her face behind the album which had been lying on
her knee, and which she had been showing to the ladies on each side of
her; for, in fact, neither she nor any one else could, without the
greatest difficulty, refrain from laughing at the monkeyfied appearance
of Titmouse. The alderman was a stout, stupid little man--a fussy old
prig--with small angry-looking black eyes, and a short red nose; as for
his head, it seemed as though he had just smeared some sticky fluid over
it, and then dipped it into a flour-tub, so thickly laden was it with
powder. Mr. Deputy Diddle-daddle was tall and thin, and serious and slow
of speech, with the solemn composure of an undertaker. Mr. Bluster was a
great Old Bailey barrister, about fifty years old, the leader constantly
employed by Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and was making at least a
thousand a-year. He had an amazingly truculent-looking countenance,
coarse to a degree, and his voice matched it; but on occasions like the
present--_i. e._ in elegant society--he would fain drop the successful
terrors of his manner, and appear the mild, dignified gentleman. He
therefore spoke in a very soft, cringing way, with an anxious smile; but
his bold insolent eye and coarse mouth--what could disguise or mitigate
their expression? Here he was, playing the great man; making himself,
however, most particularly agreeable to Messrs. Quirk and Gammon. Slang
was of the same school; fat, vulgar, confident, and empty; telling
obscene jokes and stories, in a deep bass voice. He sang a good song,
too--particularly of that class which required the absence of
ladies--and of _gentlemen_. Hug (Mr. Toady Hug) was also a barrister; a
glib little Jewish-looking fellow, creeping into considerable criminal
practice. He was a sneaking backbiter, and had a blood-hound scent after
an attorney. See him, for instance, at this moment, in close and eager
conversation with Mr. Flaw, who, rely upon it, will give him a brief
before the week is over. Viper was the editor of the _Sunday Flash_; a
cold, venomous little creature. He was a philosopher--and of opinion
that everything was wrong--moral, physical, intellectual, and social;
that there was really no such thing, or at least ought not to be, as
religion; and, as to political rights, that everybody was equal, and if
any were uppermost, all ought to be! He had failed in business twice,
and disreputably; then had become an Unitarian parson; but, having
seduced a young female member of his congregation, he was expelled from
his pulpit. An action being brought against him by the mother of his
victim, and heavy damages obtained, he attempted to take the benefit of
the Insolvent Debtors' Act--but, on account of Miss----, was remanded
for eighteen months. That period he employed in writing a shockingly
blasphemous work, for which he was prosecuted, and sentenced to a heavy
fine and imprisonment. On being released from prison, saturated with
gall and bitterness against all mankind, he took to political writing of
a very violent character, and was at length picked up, half starved, by
his present patron, Mr. Quirk, and made editor of the _Sunday Flash_. Is
not all this history written in his sallow, sinister-eyed,
bitter-expressioned countenance? Woe to him who gets into a discussion
with Viper! There were one or two others present, particularly a Mr.
Ghastly, a third-rate tragic actor, with a tremendous mouth, only one
eye, and a very hungry look. He never spoke, because no one spoke to
him, for his clothes seemed rather rusty black. The only man of
gentlemanlike appearance in the room was Mr. Gammon; and he took an
early opportunity of engaging poor Titmouse in conversation, and setting
him comparatively at his ease--a thing which was attempted by old
Quirky, but in such a fidgety-fussy way as served only to fluster
Titmouse the more. Mr. Quirk gave a dinner-party of this sort regularly
every Sunday; and they formed the happiest moments of his
life--occasions on which he _felt_ that he had achieved success in
life--on which he banished from his thoughts the responsible and
dignified anxieties of his profession; and, surrounded by a select
circle of choice spirits, such as were thus collected together, partook
joyously of the

    "Feast of reason, and the flow of soul."

"This is a very beautiful picture, Mr. Titmouse, isn't it?" said Gammon,
leading him to the farther corner of the drawing-room, where hung a
small picture, with a sort of curtain of black gauze before it. Gammon
lifted it up; and Titmouse beheld a picture of a man suspended from the
gallows, his hands tied with cords before him, his head forced aside,
and covered down to the chin with a white nightcap. 'Twas done with
sickening fidelity; and Titmouse gazed at it with a shudder. "Charming
thing, isn't it?" said Gammon, with a very expressive smile.

"Y--e--e--s," replied Titmouse, his eyes glued to the horrid object.

"Very striking thing, that--a'n't it?" quoth Quirk, bustling up to them;
"'twas painted for me by a first-rate artist, whose brother I _very
nearly_ saved from the gallows! _Like_ such things?" he inquired with a
matter-of-fact air, drawing down the black gauze.

"Yes, sir, uncommon--most uncommon!" quoth Titmouse, shuddering.

"Well, I'll show you something most particular interesting! Heard of
Gilderoy, that was hanged for forgery? Gad, my daughter's got a brooch
with a lock of his hair in it, which he gave me himself--a client of
mine; within an ace of getting him off--flaw in the indictment--found it
out myself--did, by gad! Come along, and I'll get Dora to show it to
you!" and, putting Titmouse's arm in his, and desirous of withdrawing
him from Gammon, he led him up to the interesting young lady.

"Dora," said Mr. Quirk--"just show my friend Titmouse that brooch of
yours, with Gilderoy's hair."

"Oh, my dear papa, 't is such a melancholy thing!" said she, at the same
time detaching it from her dress, and handing it to her papa, who,
holding it in his hands, gave Titmouse, and one or two others who stood
beside, a very interesting account of the last hours of the deceased
Gilderoy.

"He was _very_ handsome, papa, wasn't he?" inquired Miss Quirk, with a
sigh, and a very pensive air.

"Wasn't bad-looking; but good looks and the condemned cell don't long
agree together, _I_ can tell you!--Had many"----

"Ah, papa!" exclaimed Miss Quirk, in a mournful tone, and, leaning back
in the sofa, raised her handkerchief to her eyes.

"You are too sensitive, my love!" whispered her aunt, Mrs. Alias,
squeezing the hand of her niece, who, struggling against her feelings,
presently revived.

"We were looking just now," said Mr. Hug, addressing Mr. Quirk, "at a
very interesting addition to Miss Quirk's splendid album--that letter of
Grizzlegut."

"Ah, very striking! Value it beyond everything! Shall never forget
Grizzlegut! Very nearly got him off! 'T was an '&c.' that nearly saved
his life, through being omitted in the indictment. 'Fore gad, we thought
we'd got 'em!"

They were alluding to an autograph letter which had been addressed to
Mr. Quirk by Grizzlegut, (who had been executed for high treason a few
weeks before,) the night before he suffered. He was a blood-stained
scoundrel of the deepest dye, and ought to have been hanged and
quartered half a dozen times.

"Will you read it aloud, Mr. Hug?" inquired Miss Quirk; and the
barrister, with solemn emphasis, read the following remarkable
document:--

                                          "_Condemned Cell, Newgate,_
                                    _Sunday night, half-past 11 o'clock,_
                                                _30th April, 18--._

     "SIR,

     "At this awful moment, when this world is closing rapidly upon me
     and my fellow-sufferers, and the sounds of the wretches putting up
     the Grim Gallows are audible to my listening ears, and on the
     morrow the most horrible death that _malicious tyrants_ can inflict
     awaits me, my soul being calm and full of fortitude, and beating
     responsive to the call of GLORIOUS LIBERTY, I feel prouder than the
     King upon his throne. I feel that I have done much to secure the
     liberties of my _injured country_.

              'For Liberty, glorious Liberty,
               Who 'd fear to die?'

     Many thanks to you, sir, for your truly indefatigable efforts on my
     behalf, and the constant exercise of a skill that nearly secured us
     a _Glorious Acquittal_. What a Flame we would have raised in
     England! That should have _blasted_ the enemies of True Freedom. I
     go to Hereafter (if, indeed, there be a hereafter), as we shall
     soon know, not with my soul _crammed with Priestcraft_, but a Bold
     Briton, having laid down my life for my country, knowing that
     _Future Ages_ will do me Justice.

     "Adieu, Tyrants, adieu! Do your worst!! My soul defies you!!!

            "I am, Sir,
              "Your humble, obliged, and
                "undismayed servant,
                    "ARTHUR GRIZZLEGUT

     "To CALEB QUIRK, ESQ.

              "'Tyrants grim,
              Will, on the morrow, cut me limb from limb:--
              While Liberty looks on with terrible eye,
              And says, _I will avenge him by-and-by_.'

                    "ARTHUR GRIZZLEGUT."

The reading of the above produced a great sensation. "That man's name
will be enrolled among the Sidneys and the Hampdens of his country!"
said Viper, with a grim and excited air. "That letter deserves to be
carved on a golden tablet! The last four lines are sublime! They are
worthy of Milton! He was a martyr to principles that are silently and
rapidly making their way in this country!"--How much farther he would
have gone on in this strain, seeing no one present had resolution enough
to differ with or interrupt him, even if they had been so disposed, I
know not; but fortunately dinner was announced--a sound which startled
old Quirk out of a posture of intense attention to Viper, and evident
admiration of his sentiments. He gave his arm with an air of prodigious
politeness to the gaunt Mrs. Alderman Addlehead, whose distinguished
lord led down Miss Quirk--and the rest followed in no particular
order--Titmouse arm in arm with Gammon, who took care to place him next
to himself (Gammon). It was really a dashing sort of dinner--such,
indeed, as Mr. Quirk had long been celebrated for. Titmouse had never
seen anything like it, and was quite bewildered--particularly at the
number of differently shaped and colored glasses, &c. &c. &c,
appropriated to his individual use! He kept a constant eye on the
movements of Gammon, and did whatever he did (the two appearing moved by
the same set of springs), and was thus saved not a few embarrassments
and annoyances. What chiefly struck his attention was a prodigious
number of dishes, great and small, as if half a dozen dinners had been
crowded into one; the rapidity with which they were changed, and plates
removed, in constant succession; the incessant invitations to take wine,
flying about during the whole of dinner. For a considerable while he was
too much flurried to enjoy himself; but a few glasses of champagne
succeeded in elevating his spirits to the proper pitch--and (had he not
been checked) would soon have driven them far beyond it. Almost
everybody, except the great folk at the very top of the table, asked him
to take wine; and on every such occasion he filled his glass. In fact
Gammon, recollecting a scene at his own chamber, soon perceived that,
unless he interfered, Titmouse would be drunk long before dinner was
over. That gentleman had not imagined the earth to contain so exquisite
a drink as champagne; and he could have fallen down and worshipped it,
as it came fizzing and flashing out of the bottle. Gammon earnestly
assured him that he would be ill if he drank so much--that many eyes
were upon him--and that it was not the custom to do more than merely sip
from his wine-glass when challenging or challenged. But Titmouse had
taken a considerably greater quantity on board, before Gammon thus
interfered, than that gentleman was aware of; and began to get very
confident and voluble. Guess the progress he had made, when he called
out with a confident air--"Mr. Alderman! Your health!"--whether more to
that great man's astonishment, or disgust, I cannot undertake to say:
but after a steady stare for a moment or two at Titmouse, "Oh! I shall
be very happy, indeed, _Mr. Gammon_," he called out, looking at the
latter gentleman, and drinking with _him_. That signified nothing,
however, to Titmouse, who, indeed, did not see anything at all pointed
or unusual, and nodding confidently to the alderman, gulped down his
wine as eagerly as before.

"Cool puppy, that, Miss Quirk, must say," snuffled the offended
alderman, to Miss Quirk.

"He's young, dear Mr. Alderman," said she, sweetly and mildly--"and when
you consider the immense fortune he is coming into--ten thousand a-year,
my papa says"----

"That don't make him less a puppy--nor a brute," interrupted the ruffled
alderman, still more indignant; for his own forty thousand pounds, the
source of all his social eminence, sank into insignificance at the sound
of the splendid income just about to drop into the lap of Titmouse. Mr.
Bluster, who headed the table on Miss Quirk's left hand side, and who
felt that he _ought_ to be, but knew that in the presence of the
alderman he _was_ not, the great man of the day, observing the
irritation under which his rival was suffering, resolved to augment it
as much as possible: wherefore he immediately raised his threatening
double-glasses to his eyes, and in a tone of ostentatious condescension,
looking down the table to Titmouse, called out, "Mr. Titmash--may I have
the honor of drinking wine with you?"

"Ya--as, brother Bumptious," replied Titmouse, (who could never bear to
hear his name mispronounced,) and raised _his_ glass to his eye; "was
just going to ask _you_!" All this was done in such a loud and impudent
tone and manner, as made Gammon still more uneasy for his young
companion. But his sally had been received by the company as a very
smart retort, and produced a roar of laughter, every one being glad to
see Mr. Bluster snubbed, who bore it in silent dignity, though his face
showed his chagrin and astonishment; and he very heartily agreed, for
once in his life, with the worshipful person opposite to him, in his
estimate of our friend Titmouse. "Mr. Titmouse! Mr. Titmouse! my
daughter wonders you won't take wine with her," said Mr. Quirk, in a low
tone--"will you join us? we're going to take a glass of champagne."

"Oh! 'pon my life--delighted"--quoth Titmouse.

"Dora, my dear! Mr. Titmouse will take wine with you!--Jack," (to the
servant,) "fill Miss Quirk's and Mr. Titmouse's glasses to the brim."

"Oh no! _dearest_ papa---- gracious!" she exclaimed, removing her glass.

"Pho! pho!--nonsense--the first time of asking, you know, ah, ha!"

"Well! If it _must_ be," and with what a graceful inclination--with what
a sly searching glance, and fascinating smile, did she exchange
courtesies with Titmouse! He felt disposed to take wine with her a
second time immediately; but Gammon restrained him. Mr. Toady Hug,
having become acquainted with the brilliant prospects of Titmouse,
earnestly desired to exert his little talents to do the agreeable, and
ingratiate himself with Mr. Titmouse; but there was a counteracting
force in another direction--viz. the attorney, Mr. Flaw, who had the
greatest practice at the Clerkenwell sessions; who sat beside him and
received his most respectful and incessant attentions; Hug speaking ever
to him in a low confidential whisper, constantly casting a furtive
glance towards Bluster and Slang, to see whether they were observing
him. In "strict confidence" he assured Mr. Flaw how his case, the other
day, might have been won, if such and such a course had been adopted,
"which would have been the line _he_" (Hug) "would have taken;" and
which he explained with anxious energy. "I must say, (but don't mention
it!) that Mr. Flip regularly threw the case away--no doubt of it! By
the way, what became of that burglary case of yours, on Friday, Mr.
Flaw? Uncommonly interesting case!"

"Found guilty, poor fellows!"

"You don't say so?"

"Fact, by Jove, though!"

"How _could_ Mr. Gobble have lost that verdict? I assure you I would
have bet ten to one on your getting a verdict; for I read over your
brief as it lay beside me, and upon my honor, Mr. Flaw, it was most
admirably got up. Everything depends on the brief"----

"Glad you thought so, sir," replied Flaw, wondering how it was that he
had never before thought of giving a brief to Mr. Hug.

"It's a great mistake of counsel," quoth Hug, earnestly--"not to pay the
utmost attention to their briefs! For my part," he continued in a lower
tone, "I make a point of reading every syllable in _my_ brief, however
long it is!"

"It's the only way, depend on it, sir. We attorneys, you know, see and
know so much of the case, conversing confidentially with the
prisoners"----

"Ay, and beyond that--Your practical suggestions, my dear sir, are
often---- Now, for instance, in the brief I was alluding to, there was,
I recollect--one most--uncommonly acute suggestion"----

"Sir--you're uncommonly flattering! Am particularly obliged to you! May
I ask, what it was that struck you?"--inquired the attorney, briskly,
his countenance showing the progress of Hug's lubricating process.

"Oh--why--a--a--hem!" stammered Hug, somewhat nonplussed--(for his
little fiction had been accepted as a fact!) "No; it would hardly be
fair to Gobble, and I'm sorry indeed"----

"Well, well--it can't be helped _now_--but I must say that once or twice
latterly I've thought, myself, that Mr. Gobble has rather---- By the
way, Mr. Hug, shall you be in town this week, till the end of the
sessions?"

"Ye--e--s!" hastily whispered Hug, after glancing guiltily towards his
brethren, who, though they did not seem to do so, were really watching
him with ill-subdued fury.

"I'm happy to hear it!--You've heard of Aaron Doodle, who was committed
for that burglary at----? Well, I defend him, and shall be happy to give
you the brief. Do you lead Mr. Dolt?" Hug nodded. "Then he will be your
junior. Where are your chambers, Mr. Hug?"

"No. 4, Cant Court, Gray's Inn. When, my dear sir, does the case come
on?"

"Thursday--perhaps Wednesday."

"Then _do_ come and breakfast with me," quoth Hug, in a whisper--"and we
can talk it over, you know, so nicely together!"

"Sir, you're _very_ polite. I will do myself the pleasure"--replied Mr.
Flaw--- and good-naturedly took wine with Mr. Hug.

This little stroke of business over, the disengaged couple were at
liberty to attend to the general conversation of the table. Mr. Bluster
and Mr. Slang kept the company in almost a constant roar, with
descriptions of scenes in court, in which _they_ had, of course, been
the principal actors; and according to their own accounts they must have
been wonderful fellows. Such botherers of judges--particularly aldermen
and police magistrates!--Such bafflers and browbeaters of
witnesses!--Such bamboozlers of juries!

You should have seen the sneering countenance of Hug all the while. He
never once smiled or laughed at the brilliant sallies of his brethren,
and did his best to prevent his new patron, Mr. Flaw, from doing
so--constantly putting his hand before his mouth, and whispering into
Mr. Flaw's ear at the very point of the joke or story--and the smile
would disappear from the countenance of Mr. Flaw.

The alderman laughed till the tears ran out of his little eyes, which he
constantly wiped with his napkin! Amid the general laughter and
excitement, Miss Quirk, leaning her chin on her hand, her elbow resting
on the table, several times directed soft, languishing looks towards
Titmouse, unobserved by any one but himself; and they were not entirely
unsuccessful, although Titmouse was wonderfully taken with the stories
of the two counsellors, and believed them to be two of the greatest men
he had ever seen or heard of, and at the head of their profession.

"'Pon my soul--I hope, sir, you'll have those two gents in _my_ case?"
said he, earnestly, to Gammon.

"Unfortunately, your case will not come on in their courts," said
Gammon, with a very expressive smile.

"Why, can't it come on where I choose?--or when you like?" inquired
Titmouse, surprisedly.

Mr. Quirk had been soured during the whole of dinner, for he had
anxiously desired to have Titmouse sit beside him at the bottom of the
table; but in the little hubbub attendant upon coming down to dinner and
taking places, Titmouse slipped out of sight for a minute; and when all
were placed, Quirk's enraged eye perceived him seated in the middle of
the table, beside Gammon. Gammon _always_ got hold of Titmouse!--Old
Quirk could have flung a decanter at his head.--In his own house!--at
his own table! Always anticipating and circumventing him.

"Mr. Quirk, I don't think we've taken a glass of wine together yet, have
we?" said Gammon, blandly and cordially, at the same time pouring one
out for himself. He perfectly well knew what was annoying his respected
partner, whose look of quaint embarrassment, when so suddenly assailed,
infinitely amused him. "Catch me asking you here again, Master Gammon,"
thought Quirk, "with Titmouse!" The reason why Mr. Snap had not been
asked was, that Quirk had some slight cause to suspect his having
presumptuously conceived the notion of paying his addresses to Miss
Quirk--a thing at any time not particularly palatable to Mr. Quirk; but
in the present conjuncture of circumstances quite out of the question,
and intolerable even in idea. Snap was not slow in guessing the reason
of his exclusion, which had greatly mortified, and also not a little
alarmed him. As far as he could venture, he had, during the week,
endeavored to "set" Titmouse "against" Miss Quirk, by such faint
disparaging remarks and insinuations as he dared venture upon with so
difficult a subject as Titmouse, whom he at the same time inflamed by
representations of the splendid matches he might very soon command among
the highest women of the land. By these means Snap had, to a certain
extent, succeeded; but the few melting glances which had fallen upon
Titmouse's sensitive bosom from the eyes of Miss Quirk, were beginning
to operate a slight change in his feelings. The old alderman, on an
intimation that the "ladies were going to withdraw," laid violent hands
on Miss Quirk, (he was a "privileged" old fool,) and insisted on her
singing his favorite song--"_My Friend and Pitcher_"!! His request was
so warmly seconded by the rest of the company--Titmouse loud and eager
as any--that she was fain to comply. She sang with some sweetness, and
much self-possession; and carried Titmouse's feelings along with her
from the beginning, as Gammon, who was watching him, perceived.

"Most uncommon lovely gal, isn't she?" whispered Titmouse, with great
vivacity.

"Very!" replied Gammon, dryly, with a slight smile.

"Shall I call out _encore_? A'n't that the word? 'pon my soul, most
lovely gal! She _must_ sing it again!"

"No, no--she wishes to go--'tis not usual: she will sing it for you, I
dare say, this evening, if you ask her."

"Well--most charming gal!--Lovely!"----

"Have patience, my dear Titmouse," said Gammon, in a low whisper, "in a
few months' time you'll soon be thrown into much higher life than even
_this_--among _really_ beautiful, and rich, and accomplished
women"--[and, _thought_ Gammon, you'll resemble a monkey that has found
his way into a rich tulip-bed!]

"Fancy that girl Tag-rag standing beside Miss Quirk!" whispered
Titmouse, scornfully.

"Ha, ha!" gently laughed Gammon--"both of them, in their way, are very
worthy persons; but"--Here the ladies withdrew. 'Twas no part of
Gammon's schemes, that Titmouse should become the son-in-law of either
Quirk or Tag-rag. Mr. Gammon had formed already, vastly different plans
for him!

As soon as Quirk had taken the head of the table, and the gentlemen
drawn together, the bottles were pushed round very briskly, accompanied
by no fewer than three different sorts of snuff-boxes, all belonging to
Mr. Quirk--all of them presents from grateful Old Bailey clients! One
was a huge affair, of Botany Bay wood, with a very flaming inscription
on the inside of the lid; from which it appeared that its amiable
donors, who were trying the effect of a change of climate on their moral
health at the expense of a grateful country, owed their valuable lives
to the professional skill and exertions of "Caleb Quirk, Esq." In short,
the other two were trophies of a similar description, of which their
possessor was very justly not a little proud; and as he saw Titmouse
admiring them, it occurred to him as very possible that, within a short
time, he should be in possession of a magnificent _gold_ snuff-box, in
acknowledgment of the services he should have rendered to his
distinguished guest and client. Titmouse was in the highest possible
spirits. This, his first glimpse into high life, equalled all his
expectations. Round and round went the bottles--crack went joke after
joke. Slang sang song upon song, of, however, so very coarse and broad a
character as infinitely disgusted Gammon, and apparently shocked the
alderman;--though I greatly distrust that old sinner's sincerity in the
matter. Then Ghastly's performances commenced. Poor fellow! he exerted
himself to the utmost to earn the good dinner he had just devoured; but
when he was in the very middle of one of his most impassioned
scenes--undoubtedly "tearing a passion to rags,"--Mr. Quirk interrupted
impatiently--"Come, come, Ghastly, we've had enough of _that_ sort of
thing--it don't suit--d'ye see--at all!--Lord bless us!--don't _roar_
so, man!"

Poor Ghastly instantly resumed his seat, with a chagrined and melancholy
air.

"Give us something funny," snuffled the alderman.

"Let's have the chorus of Pigs and Ducks," said Quirk; "you do that
_remarkable_ well. I could fancy the animals were running, and
squealing, and quacking all about the room!" The actor respectfully did
as he was desired, commencing with a sigh, and was much applauded. At
length Gammon happened to get into a discussion with Mr. Bluster upon
some point connected with the Habeas Corpus Act, in which our friend
Gammon, who never got heated in discussion, and was very accurate in
whatever he knew, had glaringly the best of it. His calm, smiling
self-possession almost drove poor Bluster frantic. The less he knew, of
course the louder he talked, the more vehement and positive he became;
at length offering a _bet_ that there was no such thing as a writ of
_Habeas Corpus_ before the time of Charles II.;[20] at which Gammon
bowed, smiled, and closed the discussion. While engaged in it, he had of
course been unable to keep his eye upon Titmouse, who drank,
consequently, claret, port, sherry, and madeira, like a little fish,
never letting the decanter pass him. Every one about him filled his
glass every time--why should not he?

Hug sat next to Viper; feared him, and avoided discussion with him; for,
though they agreed in the lowest Radical politics, they had a personal
antipathy each to the other. In spite of their wishes, they at length
got entangled in a very virulent controversy, and said so many insulting
things to each other, that the rest of the company, who had for some
time been amused, got at length--not disgusted--but alarmed, for the
possible results--fully expecting the exchange of a brace of
wine-glasses against each other's heads! Mr. Quirk therefore interfered.

"Bravo! bravo! bravo!" he exclaimed, as Viper concluded a most envenomed
passage, "that will do, Viper--whip it into the next _Flash_--'t will be
a capital leader! It will produce a sensation! And in the mean time,
gentlemen, let me request you to fill your glasses--bumpers--for I have
a toast to propose, in which you'll all feel interested when you hear
who's the subject of it. It is a gentleman who is likely soon to be
elevated to a station which Nature has formed him--hem! hem!--to
adorn"----

"Mr. Quirk's proposing your health, Titmouse!" whispered Gammon to his
companion, who, having been very restless for some time, had at length
become quite silent--his head resting on his hand, his elbow on the
table--his eyes languidly half open, and his face exceedingly pale.
Gammon saw that he was, in truth, in an exceedingly ticklish condition.

"I--wish--you'd--let me--go out--I'm devilish ill"--said Titmouse,
faintly. Gammon made a signal to Quirk, who instantly ceased his speech;
and coming down to Titmouse, he and Gammon hastily led that gentleman
out of the room and into the nearest bed-chamber, where he began to be
very ill indeed, and so continued for several hours. Old Quirk, who was
a long-headed man, was delighted by this occurrence; for he saw that if
he insisted on Titmouse's being put to bed, and passing the night--and
perhaps the next day--at Alibi House, it would enable Miss Quirk to
bring her attractions to bear upon him effectively, by exhibiting those
delicate and endearing attentions which are so soothing and indeed
necessary to an invalid. Titmouse continued desperately indisposed
during the whole of the night; and, early in the morning, it was thought
advisable to send for a medical man, who pronounced Titmouse to be in
danger of a bilious fever, and to require rest and care and medical
attendance for some days to come. This was rather "too much of a good
thing" for old Quirk; but there was no remedy. Foreseeing that Titmouse
would be thrown constantly, for some little time to come, into Miss
Quirk's company, her prudent parent enjoined upon Mrs. Alias, his
sister, the necessity of impressing on his daughter's mind the great
uncertainty which, after all, existed as to Titmouse's prospects; and
the consequent necessity there was for her to regulate her conduct with
a view to either failure or success--to keep her affections, as it were,
in abeyance. But the fact was, that Miss Quirk had so often heard the
subject of Titmouse's brilliant expectations talked of by her father,
and knew so well his habitual prudence and caution, that she looked upon
Titmouse's speedy possession of ten thousand a-year as a matter almost
of certainty. She was a girl of some natural shrewdness, but of an early
inclination to maudlin sentimentality. Had she been blest with the
vigilant and affectionate care of a mother as she grew up, (that parent
having died when Miss Quirk was but a child,) and been thrown among a
set of people different from those who constantly visited at Alibi
House--and of whom a very _favorable_ specimen has been laid before the
reader--Miss Quirk might really have become a very sensible and
agreeable girl. As it was, her manners had contracted a certain
coarseness, which at length overspread her whole character; and the
selfish and mercenary motives by which she could not fail to perceive
all her father's conduct regulated, gradually infected herself. She
resolved, therefore, to be governed by the considerations so urgently
pressed upon her by both her father and her aunt.

It was several days before Titmouse was allowed, by his medical man, to
quit his bedroom; and it is impossible for any woman not to be touched
by the sight of a sudden change effected in a man's appearance by severe
indisposition and suffering, even be that man so poor a creature as
Titmouse. He was very pale, and considerably reduced by the serious
nature of the attack, and of the powerful treatment with which it had
been encountered. When he made his first appearance before Miss Quirk,
one afternoon, with somewhat feeble gait, and a languid air which
mitigated, if it did not obliterate, the foolish and conceited
expression of his features, she really regarded him with something akin
to interest; and, though she might hardly have owned it even to herself,
his expected good fortune invested him with a sort of subdued radiance.
_Ten thousand a-year_!--Miss Quirk's heart fluttered! By the time that
he was well enough to take his departure, she had, at his request, read
over to him nearly half of that truly interesting work,--the Newgate
Calendar; she had sung to him and played to him whatever he asked her;
and, in short, she felt that if she could but be certain that he would
gain his great lawsuit, and step into ten thousand a-year, she could
_love_ him. She insisted, on the day of his quitting Alibi House, that
he should write in her album; and he very readily complied. It was
nearly ten minutes before he could get a pen to suit him. At length he
succeeded, and left the following interesting memento of himself in the
very centre of a fresh page:--

    "Tittlebat Titmouse Is My name,
        England Is My Nation,
    London Is My dwelling-Place,
        And Christ Is My Salvation.
                  "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE,
                      "halibi lodge."

Miss Quirk turned pale with astonishment and vexation on seeing this
elegant and striking addition to her album. Titmouse, on the contrary,
looked at it with no little pride; for having had a capital pen, and his
heart being in his task, he had produced what he conceived to be a very
superior specimen of penmanship: in fact, the signature was by far the
best he had ever written. When he had gone, Miss Quirk was twenty times
on the point of tearing out the leaf which had been so dismally
disfigured; but on her father coming home in the evening, he laughed
heartily--"and as to tearing it out," said he, "let us first see which
way the verdict goes!"

Titmouse became, after this, a pretty frequent visitor at Alibi House;
growing more and more attached to Miss Quirk, who, however, conducted
herself towards him with much judgment. His inscription on her album had
done a vast deal towards cooling down the ardor with which she had been
disposed to regard even the future owner of ten thousand a-year. Poor
Snap seemed to have lost all chance, being treated with greater coldness
by Miss Quirk on every succeeding visit to Alibi House. At this he was
sorely discomfited; for she would have whatever money her father might
die possessed of, besides a commanding interest in the partnership
business. 'T was a difficult thing for him to preserve his temper under
such circumstances, in his close intimacy with Titmouse, who had so
grievously interfered with his prospects.

The indisposition I have been mentioning, prevented Titmouse from paying
his promised visit to Satin Lodge. On returning to his lodgings from
Alibi House, he found that Tag-rag had either called or sent every day
to inquire after him with the most affectionate anxiety; and one or two
notes lying on his table apprised him of the lively distress which the
ladies of Satin Lodge were enduring on his account, and implored him to
lose not a moment in communicating the state of his health, and
personally assuring them of his safety. Though the image of Miss Quirk
was continually before his eyes, Titmouse, nevertheless, had cunning
enough not to drop the slightest hint to the Tag-rags of the true state
of his feelings. Whenever any inquiry, with ill-disguised anxiety, was
made by Mrs. Tag-rag concerning Alibi House and its inmates, Titmouse
would, to be sure, mention Miss Quirk, but in such a careless and
slighting way as gave great consolation and encouragement to Tag-rag,
his wife, and daughter. "Miss Quirk," he said, "was well enough--but
devilish fat!"--When at Mr. Quirk's, he spoke somewhat unreservedly of
the amiable inmates of Satin Lodge. These two mansions were almost the
only private residences visited by Titmouse, who spent his time much in
the way which I have already described. How he got through his _days_ I
can hardly tell. At his lodgings he got up very late, and went to bed
very late. He never read anything excepting occasionally a song-book
lent him by Snap, or a novel, or some such book as "Boxiana," from the
circulating library, and the _Sunday Flash_. Dawdling over his dress and
his breakfast, then whistling and humming and looking out of the window,
took up so much of every day as he passed at his lodgings. The rest was
spent in idling about the town, looking in at shop windows, and now and
then going to some petty exhibition--as of sparring, cock-fighting, etc.
When evening came, he was generally joined by Snap, when they would
spend the night together in the manner I have already described. As
often as he dared, he called at Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's office
at Saffron Hill, worrying them not a little by inquiries concerning the
state of his affairs, and the cause of the delay in commencing
proceedings. As for Huckaback, by the way, Titmouse cut him entirely;
saying that he was a devilish low fellow, and it was no use knowing him.
He made many desperate efforts, both personally and by letter, to renew
his acquaintance with Titmouse, but in vain. I may as well mention, by
the way, that as soon as Snap got scent of the little money transaction
between his friend and Huckaback, he called upon the latter, and
tendering him twelve shillings, demanded up the document which he had
extorted from Titmouse. Huckaback held out obstinately for some
time--but Snap was too much for him, and talked in such a formidable
strain about an indictment for a conspiracy (!) and fraud, that
Huckaback at length consented, on receiving twelve shillings, to deliver
up the document to Snap, on condition of Snap's destroying it on the
spot. This was done, and so ended all intercourse--at least on this side
of the grave--between Titmouse (as far, at least, as _his_ intentions
went) and Huckaback.

The sum allowed by Messrs. Quirk and Gammon to Titmouse, was amply
sufficient to have kept him in comfort; but it never would have enabled
him to lead the kind of life which I have described--and he would
certainly have got very awkwardly involved, had it not been for the
kindness of Snap in advancing him, from time to time, such sums as his
exigencies required. In fact, matters went on as quietly and smoothly as
possible for several months--till about the middle of November; when an
event occurred which seemed to threaten the total demolition of all his
hopes and expectations.

He had not seen or heard from Messrs. Quirk or Gammon for nearly a
fortnight; Snap he had not seen for nearly a week. At length he ventured
to make his appearance at Saffron Hill, and was received with a
startling coldness--a stern abruptness of manner--which frightened him
out of his wits. All the three partners were alike--as for Snap, the
contrast between his present and his former manner, was perfectly
shocking: he seemed quite another person. The fact was, that the full
statement of Titmouse's claims had been laid before Mr. Subtle, the
leading counsel retained in his behalf, for his opinion on the case
generally, before actually commencing proceedings; and the partners were
indeed thunderstruck on receiving that opinion; for Mr. Subtle pointed
out a radical deficiency of proof in a matter which, as soon as their
attention was thus pointedly called to it, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were
amazed at their having overlooked, and still more at its having escaped
the notice of Mr. Tresayle, Mr. Mortmain, and Mr. Frankpledge. Mr. Quirk
hurried with the opinion to the first two of these gentlemen; and after
a long interview with each, they owned their fears that Mr. Subtle was
right, and that the defect seemed incurable; but they easily satisfied
their agitated clients, that _they_--the aforesaid Messrs. Tresayle and
Mortmain--had been guilty of neither oversight nor ignorance, inasmuch
as the matter in question was one of _evidence_ only--one which a _nisi
prius_ lawyer, with a full detail of "proofs" before him, could hardly
fail to light upon--but which, it would be found, had been _assumed_,
and _taken for granted_, in the cases laid before conveyancers. They
promised, however, to turn it over in their minds, and to let Messrs.
Quirk and Gammon know if anything occurred to vary their impression. A
week elapsed, however, and Mr. Tresayle and Mr. Mortmain preserved an
ominous silence. As for Frankpledge, he had a knack, somehow or another,
of always coming to the conclusion wished and hoped for by his clients;
and, after prodigious pains, he wrote a very long opinion, to show that
there was nothing in the objection. Neither Mr. Quirk nor Mr. Gammon
could understand the process by which Mr. Frankpledge arrived at such a
result; but, in despair, they laid his opinion before Mr. Subtle, in the
shape of a further "Case for his Opinion." It was in a few days' time
returned to them, with only a line or two--thus:--

     "I see no reason whatever to depart from the view I have already
     taken of this case.--J. S."

Here was something like a dead lock, indeed!

"We're _done_, Gammon!" said Quirk, with a dismayed air. Gammon seemed
lost, and made no answer.

"Does anything--eh?" quoth Quirk, with a troubled air. "_Any_thing occur
to you? Gammon, I _will_ say this for you--you're a long-headed fellow!"
Still Gammon spoke not.

"Gammon! Gammon! I really believe--ah?--you--you--begin to see
something--don't you?"

"_It's to be_ DONE, Mr. Quirk!" said Gammon, at length, with a grave and
apprehensive look, and a cheek which had suddenly grown pale.

"Eh? how? Oh, I see!--Know what you mean, Gammon," replied Quirk, with a
hurried whisper, glancing at both doors to see that they were safe.

"We must resume our intercourse with Titmouse, and let matters go on as
before," said Gammon, with a very anxious, but, at the same time, a
determined air.

"I--I wonder if what has occurred to _you_ is what has occurred to me?"
inquired Quirk, in an eager whisper.

"Pooh! pooh! Mr. Quirk."

"Gammon, dear Gammon, no mystery! You know I have a very deep stake in
this matter!"

"So have I, Mr. Quirk," replied Gammon, with a sigh. "However"--Here the
partners put their heads close together, and whispered to each other in
a low, earnest tone, for some minutes. Quirk rose from his seat, and
took two or three turns about the room in silence, Gammon watching him
calmly.

To his inexpressible relief and joy, within a few hours of the happening
of the above colloquy, Titmouse found himself placed on precisely his
former footing with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap.

In order to bring on the cause for trial at the next spring assizes, it
was necessary that the declaration in ejectment should be served on the
tenant in possession before Hilary term; and, in a matter of such
magnitude, it was deemed expedient that Snap should proceed to
Yorkshire, and personally effect the service in question. In
consequence, also, of some very important suggestions as to the
evidence, given by the junior in the cause, (Mr. Lynx,) it was arranged
that Snap should go down about a week before the time fixed upon for
effecting the service, and make quietly certain minute inquiries in the
neighborhood of Yatton. As soon as Titmouse had heard of this
movement--that Snap was going direct to Yatton, the scene of his,
Titmouse's, future greatness--he made the most pertinacious and vehement
entreaties to Messrs. Quirk and Gammon to be allowed to accompany him,
even going down on his knees. There was no resisting this; but they
exacted from him a solemn pledge that he would place himself entirely at
the disposal of Mr. Snap; go under some feigned name, and, in short,
neither say nor do anything tending to disclose their real character or
errand.

Snap and Titmouse established themselves at the Hare and Hounds Inn at
Grilston; and the former immediately began, cautiously and quietly, to
collect such evidence as he could discover. One of the first persons to
whom he went was old Blind Bess. His many pressing questions at length
stirred up in the old woman's mind faint confused recollections of
long-forgotten names, persons, places, scenes, and associations, thereby
producing an agitation not easily to be got rid of, and which had by no
means subsided when Dr. Tatham and Mr. Aubrey paid her the Christmas-day
visit, which has been described.




CHAPTER XI.


The reader has had, already, pretty distinct indications of the manner
in which Titmouse and Snap conducted themselves during their stay in
Yorkshire; and which, I fear, have not tended to raise either of these
gentlemen in the reader's estimation. Titmouse manifested a very natural
anxiety to see the present occupants of Yatton; and it was with infinite
difficulty that Snap could prevent him from sneaking about in the
immediate neighborhood of the Hall, with the hope of seeing them. His
first encounter with Mr. and Miss Aubrey was entirely accidental, as the
reader may remember; and when he found that the lady on horseback near
Yatton, and the lady whom he had striven to attract the notice of in
Hyde Park, were one and the same beautiful woman, and that that
beautiful woman was neither more nor less than the sister of the present
owner of Yatton--the marvellous discovery created a mighty pother in his
little feelings. The blaze of Kate Aubrey's beauty in an instant
consumed the images both of Tabitha Tag-rag and Dora Quirk. It even for
a while outshone the splendors of ten thousand a-year: such is the
inexpressible and incalculable power of woman's beauty over everything
in the shape of man--over even so despicable a sample of him, as
Tittlebat Titmouse.

While putting in practice some of those abominable tricks to which,
under Snap's tutelage, Titmouse had become accustomed in walking the
streets of London, and from which even the rough handling they had got
from farmer Hazel could not turn him, Titmouse at length, as has been
seen, most unwittingly fell foul of that fair creature, Catherine Aubrey
herself; who seemed truly like an angelic messenger, returning from her
errand of sympathy and mercy, and suddenly beset by a little imp of
darkness. When Titmouse discovered who was the object of his audacious
and revolting advances, his soul (such as it was) seemed petrified
within him; and it was fortunate that the shriek of Miss Aubrey's
attendant at length startled him into a recollection of a pair of heels,
to which he was that evening indebted for an escape from a most
murderous cudgelling, which might have been attended with one effect not
contemplated by him who inflicted it, (so profoundly in the dark are we
as to the causes and consequences of human actions;) viz. the retention
of the Aubreys in the possession of Yatton! Titmouse ran for nearly half
a mile on the high-road towards Grilston, without stopping. He dared not
venture to return to Yatton, with the sound of the lusty farmer's voice
in his ears, to get back from the Aubrey Arms the horse which had
brought him that afternoon from Grilston, to which place, therefore, he
walked on, through the snow and darkness; reaching his inn in a perfect
panic, from which, at length, a tumbler of stiff brandy and water, with
two or three cigars, somewhat relieved him. Forgetful of the solemn
pledge which he had given to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, not to
disclose his name or errand, and it never once occurring to him that if
he would but keep his own counsel, Miss Aubrey could never identify
_him_ with the ruffian who had assailed her; Titmouse spent the interval
between eight and twelve o'clock, at which latter hour the coach by
which he had resolved to return to London would pass through Grilston,
in inditing the following letter to Miss Aubrey:--

                                        "_Grilston, January 6th, 18--._
     "HONORED MISS,

     "Hoping No Offence Will Be Taken where None is meant, (_which am
     Sure of_,) This I send To say Who I Am which, Is the Right And True
     Owner of Yatton which You Enjoy Amongst You All At This present
     (Till The Law Give it to _Me_) Which It quickly Will, and No
     Mistake, And which It Ought to Have done When I were First born And
     Before Y^r Respect^e. Family ever Came into it, And All which Y^r
     hon^d. Brother Have so unlawfully Got Possession Of must Come Back
     to Them Whose Due It is w^h Is myself as will be Soon prov^d. And
     w^h am most truely Sorry Of _on your own Acc^t_. (Meaning (hon^d.
     Miss) you Alone) as Sure As Yatton is Intirely Mine So My Heart Is
     _yours_ and No Longer my Own Ever since I Saw You first as Can
     Easily prove but w^h doubtless You Have forgot Seeing You Never
     New, because (as Mr. Gammon, My Solliciter And a Very Great Lawyer,
     says) _Cases Alter Circumstances_, what Can I say More Than that I
     Love you _Most Amazing_ Such As Never Thought Myself Capable of
     Doing Before and w^h cannot help Ever Since I First saw your most
     _Lovely_ and _Divine_ and _striking_ Face w^h have Stuck In my Mind
     Ever Since Day and Night Sleeping and Waking I will Take my Oath
     Never Of Having Lov'd Any one Else, Though (must Say) have Had a
     Wonderful Many _Offers_ From Females of _The Highest Rank_ Since my
     Truely Wonderful Good fortune got Talked About every Where but have
     _Refused Them All_ for _y^r sake_, And Would All the World But you.
     When I Saw You on Horseback It was All my Sudden confusion In
     Seeing you (the Other Gent. was One of my Resp^e Solicitors) w^h
     Threw Me off in that Ridiculous Way w^h was a Great Mortification
     And made My brute Of A horse _go on so_, For I Remembered You and
     was Wonderful struck _with Your Improv'd Appearance_ (As that Same
     Gent. can Testify) And you was (Hon^d. Miss) Quite Wrong _To
     Night_ when You Spoke so Uncommon Angry To Me, seeing If I Had Only
     Known What Female It Was (meaning _yourself which I respect So_)
     out so Late Alone I should Have spoke quite Different So hope You
     Will think Nothing More Of that Truely _Unpleasant Event_ Now
     (Hon^d. Madam) What I have to say Is if You will Please to
     Condescend To Yield To My Desire We Can Live Most uncommon
     Comfortable at Yatton Together w^h Place shall Have Great Pleasure
     (if _you_ please) in _Marrying You From_ and I may (_perhaps_) Do
     Something handsome for y^r. respectable Brother and Family, w^h can
     Often Come to see us And Live in the Neighborhood, if You Refuse
     me, Will not say What shall Happen to _Those_ which (am Told) _Owe
     me a Precious Long Figure_ w^h May (_perhaps_) Make a Handsome
     Abatement in, if You And I _Hit it_.

     "Hoping You Will Forget What Have So Much Griev^d. me, And Write
     p^t. return of Post,

          "Am,
            "hon^d. Miss
        "Y^r. most Loving & Devoted Servant
            "(Till Death)
              TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.
       "PARTICULAR Private."

This exquisitely constructed document its accomplished writer sealed
twice, and then left, together with sixpence, in the hands of the
landlady of the Hare and Hounds, to be delivered at Yatton Hall the
first thing in the morning. The good woman, however--having no
particular wish to oblige such a strange puppy, whom she was only too
glad to get rid of, and having moreover a good deal to attend to--laid
the letter aside on the chimney-piece, and entirely lost sight of it for
nearly a fortnight. Shortly after the lamentable tidings concerning the
impending misfortunes of the Aubrey family had been communicated to the
inhabitants of Grilston, she forwarded the letter, (little dreaming of
the character in which its writer was likely, erelong, to reappear at
Grilston,) together with one or two others, a day or two after Miss
Aubrey had had the interview with her brother which I have described to
the reader; but it lay unnoticed by any one--above all, by the sweet
sufferer whose name was indicated on it--among a great number of
miscellaneous letters and papers which had been suffered to accumulate
on the library table.

Mr. Aubrey entered the library one morning, alone, for the purpose of
attending to many matters which had been long neglected. He was
evidently thinner: his face was pale, and his manner dejected: still
there was about him an air of calmness and resolution. Through the
richly-pictured old stained-glass window, the mottled sunbeams were
streaming in a kind of tender radiance upon the dear familiar objects
around him. All was silent. Having drawn his chair to the table, on
which was lying a confused heap of letters and papers, he felt a
momentary repugnance to enter upon the task which he had assigned to
himself; and rose and walked slowly for some time up and down the room,
with folded arms, uttering occasionally profound sighs. At length he
resumed his seat, and commenced the disheartening task of opening the
many letters before him. One of the earliest that came to his hand was
from Peter Johnson--the old tenant to whom he had lent the sum of two
hundred pounds, and it was full of fervent expressions of gratitude and
respect; Mr. Aubrey's heart ached as he read them. Then came a letter, a
fortnight old, bearing the frank of Lord C----, the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs. He opened it and read:--

                                        "_Whitehall, 16th January, 18--._

     "My DEAR AUBREY,

     "You will remember that Lord ----'s motion stands for the 28th. We
     all venture to calculate upon receiving your powerful support in
     the debate. We expect to be much pressed with the Duke of ----'s
     affair, which you handled shortly before the recess with such
     signal ability and success. When you return to town, you must
     expect a renewal of certain offers, which I most sincerely trust,
     for the benefit of the public service, will not be _again_
     declined.

                                       "Ever yours faithfully,
                                              "C----.
                                     "(Private and confidential.)
     "CHARLES AUBREY, Esq. M. P."

Mr. Aubrey laid down the letter calmly, as soon as he had read it; and
leaning back in his chair, seemed lost in thought for several minutes.
Presently he reapplied himself to his task, and opened and glanced over
a great many letters; the contents of several of which occasioned him
deep emotion. Some were from persons in distress whom he had assisted,
and who implored a continuance of his aid; others were from ardent
political friends--some sanguine, others desponding--concerning the
prospects of the session. Two or three hinted that it was everywhere
reported that he had been offered one of the under secretaryships, and
had declined; but that it was, at the king's desire, to be pressed upon
him. Many letters were on private, and still more on county, business;
and with one of them he was engaged when a servant entered with one of
that morning's county newspapers. Tired with his task, Mr. Aubrey rose
from his chair as the servant gave him the paper; and, standing before
the fire, unfolded the _Yorkshire Stingo_, and glanced listlessly over
its miscellaneous contents. At length his eye lit upon the following
paragraph:--

     "The rumors so deeply affecting a member for a certain borough in
     this county, and to which we alluded in our last paper but one,
     turn out to be well founded. A claimant has started up to the very
     large estates at present held by the gentleman in question; and we
     are much misinformed if the ensuing spring assizes will not effect
     a considerable change in the representation of the borough alluded
     to, by relieving it from the Tory thraldom under which it has been
     so long oppressed. We have no wish to bear hard upon a falling man;
     and, therefore, shall make no comment upon the state of mind in
     which that person may be presumed to be, who must be conscious of
     having been so long enjoying the just rights of others. Some
     extraordinary disclosures may be looked for when the trial comes
     on. We have heard from a quarter on which we are disposed to place
     reliance, that the claimant is a gentleman of decided Whig
     principles, and who will prove a valuable accession to the Liberal
     cause."[21]

Mr. Aubrey was certainly somewhat shocked by brutality such as this; but
on Miss Aubrey's entering the room, he quietly folded up the paper and
laid it aside, fearful lest his sister's feelings should be pierced by
the coarse and cruel paragraph which it contained. It had, in fact, been
concocted in London, in the office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap;
who were, as before stated, interested in the _Sunday Flash_, which was
in some sort connected, through the relationship of the editors, with
the _Yorkshire Stingo_. The idea had been suggested by Gammon, by way of
attempting to enlist the _political_ feeling of a portion of the county,
in favor of their client.

"Here are several letters for _you_, Kate," said her brother, picking
out several of them. The very first she took up, it having attracted her
attention by the double seal, and the vulgar style of the handwriting,
was that from Titmouse, which has just been laid before the reader. With
much surprise she opened the letter, her brother being similarly engaged
with his own; and her face getting gradually paler and paler as she went
on, at length she flung it on the floor with a passionate air, and burst
into tears. Her brother, with astonishment, exclaimed--"Dear Kate, what
is it?" and he rose and stooped to pick up the letter.

"Don't--don't, Charles!" she cried, putting her foot upon it, and
flinging her arms round his neck. "It is an audacious letter--a vulgar,
a cruel letter, dear Charles!" Her emotion increased as her thoughts
recurred to the heartless paragraph concerning her brother with which
the letter concluded. "I could have overlooked everything but _that_,"
said she, unwittingly. With gentle force he succeeded in getting hold
of the painfully ridiculous and contemptible effusion. He attempted
faintly to smile several times as he went on.

"Don't--don't, dearest Charles!" said she, passionately. "I can't bear
it!--Don't smile!--It's very far from your heart; you do it only to
assure _me_!"

Here Mr. Aubrey read the paragraph concerning himself. His face turned a
little paler than before, and his lips quivered with suppressed emotion.
"He is evidently a _very_ foolish fellow!" he exclaimed, walking towards
the window, with his back to his sister, whom he did not wish to see how
much he was affected by so petty an incident.

"What does he allude to, Kate, when he talks of your having spoken
angrily to him, and that he did not know you?" he inquired, after a few
moments' pause, returning to her.

"Oh, dear!--I am so _grieved_ that you should have noticed it--but since
you ask I will not deceive you!" and she told him the disgusting
occurrence alluded to in the letter. Mr. Aubrey drew himself up
unconsciously as Kate went on, and she perceived him becoming still
paler than before, and _felt_ the kindling anger of his eye.

"Forget it--forget it, dearest Charles!--So despicable a being is really
not worth a thought," said Kate, with increasing anxiety; for she had
never in her life before witnessed her brother the subject of such
powerful emotions as then made rigid his slender frame. At length
drawing a long breath--

"It is fortunate for him, Kate," said he, calmly, "that _he_ is not a
gentleman, and that I _endeavor to be_--a Christian." She flung her arms
round him, exclaiming, "There spoke my own noble brother!"

"I shall preserve this letter as a curiosity, Kate," said he, presently,
and with a faint smile, and a pointed significance of manner, which
arrested his sister's attention, he added,--"It is rather singular, but
some time before you came in, I opened a letter in which your name is
mentioned--I cannot say in a _similar_ manner, and yet--in short, it is
from Lord De la Zouch, enclosing one"----

Miss Aubrey suddenly blushed scarlet, and trembled violently.

"Don't be agitated, my dear Kate, the enclosure is from Lady De la
Zouch; and if it be in the same strain of kindness that pervades Lord De
la Zouch's letter to _me_"----

"I would rather that _you_ opened and read it, Charles"--she faltered,
sinking into a chair.

"Come, come, dear Kate--play the woman!" said her brother, with an
affectionate air--"To say that there is nothing in these letters that I
believe will interest you--very deeply gratify and interest your
feelings--would be"----

"I know--I--I--suspect--I"---- faltered Miss Aubrey, with much
agitation--"I shall return."

"Then you shall take these letters with you, and read, or not read them,
as you like," said her brother, putting them into her hand with a fond
and sorrowful smile, which soon, however, flitted away--and, leading her
to the door, he was once more alone; and, after a brief interval of
revery, he wrote answers to such of the many letters before him as he
considered earliest to require them.

Notwithstanding the judgment and tenderness with which Dr. Tatham
discharged the very serious duty which, at the entreaty of his afflicted
friends, he had undertaken, of breaking to Mrs. Aubrey the calamity with
which she and her family were menaced, the effects of the disclosure had
been most disastrous. They occasioned an attack of paralysis; and Mr.
Aubrey, who had long been awaiting the issue, in sickening suspense, in
an adjoining room, was hastily summoned in to behold a mournful and
heart-rending spectacle. His venerable mother--she who had given him
life, at the mortal peril of her own; she whom he cherished with
unutterable tenderness and reverence; she who doted upon him as upon the
light of her eyes; from whose dear lips he had never heard a word of
unkindness or severity; whose heart had never known an impulse but of
gentle, noble, unbounded generosity towards all around her--this
idolized being now lay suddenly prostrated and blighted before him----

Poor Aubrey yielded to his long and violent agony, in the presence of
her who could apparently no longer hear or see, or be sensible of what
was passing in the chamber.

"My son," said Dr. Tatham, after the first burst of his friend's grief
was over, and he knelt down beside his mother with her hand grasped in
his, "despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his
correction:

"For whom the Lord loveth, he correcteth, even as a father the son in
whom he delighteth.

"The Lord will not cast off forever;

"But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies.

"For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men."

It was with great difficulty that Dr. Tatham could render himself
audible while uttering these soothing and solemn passages of Scripture
in the ear of his distracted friend, beside whom he knelt.

Mrs. Aubrey had suffered a paralytic seizure, and lay motionless and
insensible; her features slightly disfigured, but partially concealed
beneath her long silvery gray hair, which had, in the suddenness of the
fit, strayed from beneath her cap.

"But what am I about?" at length exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, with a languid
and alarmed air--"has medical assistance"----

"Dr. Goddart and Mr. Whately are both sent for by several servants, and
will doubtless be very quickly here," replied Dr. Tatham; and while he
yet spoke, Mr. Whately--who, when hastened on by the servant who had
been sent for him, was entering the park on a visit to young Mrs.
Aubrey, who was also seriously ill and in peculiarly critical
circumstances--entered the room, and immediately resorted to the
necessary measures. Soon afterwards, also, Dr. Goddart arrived; but
alas, how little could they do for the venerable sufferer!

During the next, and for many ensuing days, the lodge was assailed by
very many anxious and sympathizing inquirers, who were answered by
Waters, whom Mr. Aubrey--oppressed by the number of friends who hurried
up to the Hall, and insisted upon seeing him to ascertain the extent to
which the dreadful rumors were correct--had stationed there during the
day to afford the requisite information. The Hall was pervaded by a
gloom which could be _felt_. Every servant had a woe-begone look, and
moved about as if a funeral were stirring. Little Charles and Agnes,
almost imprisoned in their nursery, seemed quite puzzled and confused at
the strange unusual seriousness, and quietness, and melancholy faces
everywhere about them. Kate romped not with them as had been her wont;
but would constantly burst into tears as she held them on her knee or in
her arms, trying to evade the continual questioning of Charles. "I think
it will be time for _me_ to cry too, by-and-by!" said he to her one day,
with an air half in jest and half in earnest, that made poor Kate's
tears flow afresh. Sleepless nights and days of sorrow soon told upon
her appearance. Her glorious buoyancy of spirits, which erewhile, as it
were, had filled the whole Hall with gladness--where were they now? Ah,
me! the rich bloom had disappeared from her beautiful cheek; but her
high spirit, though oppressed, was not broken, and she stood firmly and
calmly amid the scowling skies and lowering tempests. You fancied you
saw her auburn tresses stirred upon her pale but calm brow by the breath
of the approaching storm; and that she also felt it, but trembled not,
gazing on it with a bright and steadfast eye. Her _heart_ might be,
indeed, bruised and shaken; but her _spirit_ was, ay, unconquerable. My
glorious Kate, how my heart goes forth towards you!

And thou, her brother, who art of kindred spirit; who art supported by
philosophy, and exalted by religion, so that thy constancy cannot be
shaken or overthrown by the black and ominous swell of trouble which is
increasing and closing around thee, I know that thou wilt outlive the
storm--and yet it rocks thee!

A month or two may see thee and thine expelled from Old Yatton, and not
merely having lost everything, but with a liability to thy successor
which will hang round thy neck like a millstone. What, indeed, is to
become of you all? Whither will you go? And your suffering mother,
should she indeed survive so long, is her precious form to be borne away
from Yatton?

Around thee stand those who, if thou fallest, will perish--and that thou
knowest; around thy calm, sorrowful, but erect figure, are a melancholy
group--thy afflicted mother--the wife of thy bosom--thy two little
children--thy brave and beautiful sister--Yet think not, Misfortune!
that over this man thou art about to achieve thy accustomed triumphs.
Here, behold, thou hast a MAN to contend with; nay, more, a CHRISTIAN
MAN, who hath calmly girded up his loins against the coming fight!

'Twas Sabbath evening, some five weeks or so after the happening of the
mournful events above commemorated, and Kate, having spent, as usual,
several hours keeping watch beside the silent and motionless figure of
her mother, had quitted the chamber for a brief interval, thinking to
relieve her oppressed spirits by walking, for a little while, up and
down the long gallery. Having slowly paced backwards and forwards once
or twice, she rested against the little oriel window at the farthest
extremity of the gallery, and gazed with saddened eye upon the setting
sun, till at length, in calm grandeur, it disappeared beneath the
horizon. 'Twas to Kate a solemn and mournful sign; especially followed
as it was by the deepening shadows and gloom of evening. She sighed, and
with her hands crossed on her bosom, gazed, with a tearful eye, into the
darkening sky, where glittered the brilliant evening star. Thus she
remained, a thousand pensive and tender thoughts passing through her
mind, till the increasing chills of evening warned her to retire. "I
will go," said she to herself, as she walked slowly along, "and try to
play the evening hymn--I may not have _many_ more opportunities!" With
this view, she gently opened the drawing-room door, and, glancing
around, found that she should be alone. The fire gave the only light.
She opened the organ with a sigh, and then sat down before it for some
minutes without touching the keys. At length she struck them very
gently, as if fearful of disturbing those who, she soon recollected,
were too distant to hear her. Ah! how many associations were stirred up
as she played over the simple and solemn air! At length, in a low and
rather tremulous voice, she began--

    "Soon will the evening star, with silver ray,
    Shed its mild radiance o'er the sacred day;
    Resume we, then, ere night and silence reign,
    The rites which holiness and heaven ordain"----

She sang the last line somewhat indistinctly; and, overcome by a flood
of tender recollections, ceased playing; then, leaning her head upon her
hand, she shed tears. At length she resumed--

    "Here humbly let us hope our Maker's smile
    Will crown with sweet success our earthly toil--
    And here, on each returning Sabbath, join"----

Here poor Kate's voice quivered--and after one or two ineffectual
attempts to sing the next line, she sobbed, and ceased playing. She
remained for several minutes, her face buried in her handkerchief,
shedding tears. At length, "I'll play the last verse," thought she, "and
then sit down before the fire, and read over the evening service,"
(feeling for her little prayer-book,) "before I return to poor mamma!"
With a firmer hand and voice she proceeded--

    "Father of Heaven! in whom our hopes confide,
    Whose power defends us, and whose precepts guide--
    In life our guardian, and in death our friend,
    Glory supreme be thine, till time shall end."

She played and sang these lines with a kind of solemn energy; and she
felt as if a ray of heavenly light had trembled for a moment upon her
upturned eye. She had not been, as she had supposed, alone; in the
farthest corner of the room had been all the while sitting her
brother--too exquisitely touched by the simplicity and goodness of his
sweet sister, to apprise her of his presence. Several times his feelings
had nearly overpowered him; and as she concluded, he arose from his
chair, and approaching her, after her first surprise was over,--"Heaven
bless you, dear Kate!" said he, taking her hands in his own. Neither of
them spoke for a few moments.

"I could not have sung a line, or played, if I had known that you were
here," said she, tremulously.

"I thought so, Kate, and therefore I remained silent"--

"I don't think I shall ever have heart to play again!" she replied--they
were both silent.

"Be assured, Kate, that submission to the will of God," said Mr. Aubrey,
as (he with his arm round his sister) they walked slowly to and fro, "is
the great lesson to be learned from the troubles of life; and for that
purpose they are sent. Let us bear up awhile; the waters will not go
over our heads!"

"I hope not," replied his sister, faintly, and in tears. "How did you
leave Agnes, Charles?"

"She was asleep; she is still very feeble"---- Here the door was
suddenly opened, and Miss Aubrey's maid entered hastily, exclaiming,
"Are you here, ma'am?--or sir?"

"Here we are," they replied, hurrying towards her; "what is the matter?"

"Oh, Madam is _talking_! She began speaking all of a sudden. She did,
indeed, sir. She's talking, and"---- continued the girl, almost
breathless.

"My mother talking!" exclaimed Aubrey, with an amazed air.

"Oh yes, sir! she is--she is, indeed!"

Miss Aubrey sank into her brother's arms, overcome for a moment with the
sudden and surprising intelligence.

"Rouse yourself, Kate!" he exclaimed with animation; "did I not tell you
that Heaven would not forget us? But I must hasten up-stairs, to hear
the joyful sounds with my own ears--and do you follow as soon as you
can." Leaving her in the care of her maid, he hastened out of the room,
and was soon at the door of his mother's chamber. He stood for a moment
in the doorway, and his straining ears caught the gentle tones of his
mother's voice, speaking in a low but cheerful tone. His knees trembled
beneath him with joyful excitement. Fearful of trusting himself in her
presence till he had become calmer, he noiselessly sank on the nearest
chair, with beating heart and straining ear--ay, every tone of that dear
voice thrilled through his heart. But I shall not torture myself or my
reader by dwelling upon the scene which ensued. Alas! the venerable
sufferer's tongue was indeed loosed;--but reason had fled! He
listened--he distinguished her words. She supposed that all her
children--dead and alive--were romping about her; she spoke of him and
his sister as she had spoken to them twenty years ago!

As soon as he had made this woful discovery, overwhelmed with grief, he
staggered out of the room; and motioning his sister, who was entering,
into an adjoining apartment, communicated to her, with great agitation,
the lamentable condition of their mother.




CHAPTER XII.


The chief corner-stone suddenly found wanting in the glittering fabric
of Mr. Titmouse's fortune, so that, to the eyes of its startled
architects, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, it seemed momentarily
threatening to tumble about their ears, was a certain piece of evidence
which, being a matter-of-fact man, I should like to explain to the
reader, before we get on any farther. In order, however, to do this
effectually, I must go back to an earlier period in the history than has
been yet called to his attention. I make no doubt, that by the
superficial and impatient _novel_-reader, certain portions of what has
gone before, and which could not fail of attracting the attention of
long-headed people, as not likely to have been thrown in for nothing,
(and therefore requiring to be borne in mind with a view to subsequent
explanation,) have been entirely overlooked or forgotten. However this
may be, I can fancy that the sort of reader whom I have in my eye, as
one whose curiosity it is worth some pains to excite, and sustain, has
more than once asked himself the following question, viz.--

How did Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, first come to be acquainted
with the precarious tenure by which Mr. Aubrey held the Yatton
property?--Why, it chanced in this wise.

Mr. Parkinson of Grilston, who has been already introduced to the
reader, had succeeded to his father's first-rate business as a country
attorney and solicitor in Yorkshire. He was a highly honorable,
painstaking man, and deservedly enjoyed the entire confidence of all
his numerous and influential clients. Some twelve years before the
period at which this history commences, he had, from pure kindness,
taken into his service an orphan boy of the name of Steggars, at first
merely as a sort of errand-boy, and to look after the office. He soon,
however, displayed so much sharpness, and acquitted himself so
creditably in anything that he happened to be concerned in, a little
above the run of his ordinary duties, that in the course of a year or
two he became a sort of clerk, and sat and wrote at the desk it had
formerly been his sole province to dust. Higher and higher did he rise,
in process of time, in his master's estimation; and at length became
quite a _factotum_--as such, acquainted with the whole course of
business that passed through the office. Many interesting matters
connected with the circumstances and connections of the neighboring
nobility and gentry were thus constantly brought under his notice, and
now and then set him thinking whether the knowledge thus acquired could
not, in some way, and at some time or another, be turned to his own
advantage; for I am sorry to say that he was utterly unworthy of the
kindness and confidence of Mr. Parkinson, who little thought that in
Steggars he had to deal with--a rogue in grain. Such being his
character, and such his opportunities, this worthy had long made a
practice of minuting down, from time to time, anything of interest or
importance in the affairs of his betrayed master's clients--even
laboriously copying long documents, when he thought them of importance
enough for his purpose, and had the opportunity of doing so without
attracting the attention of Mr. Parkinson. He thus silently acquired a
mass of information which might have enabled him to occasion great
annoyance, and even inflict serious injury; and the precise object he
had in view, was either to force himself, hereafter, into partnership
with his employer, (provided he could get regularly introduced into the
profession,) or even compel his master's clients to receive him into
their confidence, adversely to Mr. Parkinson; and make it worth his
while to keep the secrets of which he had become possessed. So careful
ought to be, and indeed generally are, attorneys and solicitors, as to
the characters of those whom they thus receive into their employ. On the
occasion of Mr. Aubrey's intended marriage with Miss St. Clair, with a
view to the very liberal settlements which he contemplated, a full
"Abstract" of his "Title" was laid by Mr. Parkinson before his
conveyancer, in order to advise, and to prepare the necessary
instruments. Owing to inquiries suggested by the conveyancer, additional
statements were laid before him; and produced an opinion of a somewhat
unsatisfactory description, from which I shall lay before the reader the
following paragraph:--

     "...There seems no reason for supposing that any descendant of
     Stephen Dreddlington is now in existence;[22] still, _as it is by
     no means physically impossible that such a person may be in esse_,
     it would unquestionably be most important to the security of Mr.
     Aubrey's title, to establish clearly the validity of the conveyance
     by way of mortgage, executed by Harry Dreddlington, and which was
     afterwards assigned to Geoffrey Dreddlington on his paying off the
     money borrowed by his deceased uncle; since the descent of Mr.
     Aubrey from Geoffrey Dreddlington would, in that event, clothe him
     with an indefeasible title at law, by virtue of that deed; and any
     equitable rights which were originally outstanding, would be barred
     by lapse of time. But the difficulty occurring to my mind on this
     part of the case is, that unless Harry Dreddlington, who executed
     that deed of mortgage, survived his father, (a point on which I am
     surprised that I am furnished with no information,) the deed itself
     would have been mere waste parchment, as in reality the conveyance
     of a person who _never had any interest_ in the Yatton
     property--and, of course, neither Geoffrey Dreddlington, nor his
     descendant, Mr. Aubrey, could derive any right whatever under such
     an instrument. In that case, such a contingency as I have above
     hinted at--I mean the existence of any legitimate descendant of
     Stephen Dreddlington--_might have a most serious effect upon the
     rights of Mr. Aubrey_."

Now every line of this opinion, and also even of the Abstract of Title
upon which it was written, did this quicksighted young scoundrel copy
out, and deposit, as a great prize, in his desk, among other similar
notes and memoranda,--little wotting his master, the while, of what his
clerk was doing. Some year or two afterwards, the relationship
subsisting between Mr. Parkinson and his clerk Steggars, was suddenly
determined by a somewhat untoward event; viz. by the latter's decamping
with the sum of £700 sterling, being the amount of money due on a
mortgage which he had been sent to receive from a client of Mr.
Parkinson's. Steggars fled for it--but first having bethought himself of
the documents to which I have been alluding, and which he carried with
him to London. Hot pursuit was made after the enterprising Mr. Steggars,
who was taken into custody two or three days after his arrival in town,
while he was walking about the streets, with the whole of the sum which
he had embezzled, _minus_ a few pounds, upon his person, in bank-notes.
He was quickly deposited in Newgate. His natural sagacity assured him
that his case was rather an ugly one; but hope did not desert him.

"Well, my kiddy," said Grasp, the grim-visaged, gray-headed turnkey, as
soon as he had ushered Steggars into his snug little quarters; "here you
are, you see--isn't you?"

"I think I am," replied Steggars, with a sigh.

"Well--and if you want to have a chance of not going across the water
afore your time, you'll get yourself _defended_, and the sooner the
better, d'ye see. There's _Quirk_, _Gammon_, and _Snap_--my eyes! how
they _do_ thin this here place of ours, to be sure! The only thing is to
get 'em soon; 'cause, ye see, they're so run after. Shall I send them to
you?"

Steggars answered eagerly in the affirmative. In order to account for
this spontaneous good-nature on the part of Grasp, I must explain that
old Mr. Quirk had for years secured a highly respectable criminal
practice, by having in his interest most of the officers attached to the
police-offices and Newgate. He gave, in fact, systematic gratuities to
these gentry, in order to get their recommendations to the persecuted
individuals who came into their power. Very shortly after Grasp's
messenger had reached Saffron Hill, with the intelligence that "there
was _something new in the trap_," old Quirk bustled down to Newgate, and
was introduced to Steggars, with whom he was closeted for some time. He
took a lively interest in his new client, to whose narrative of his
flight and capture he listened in a very kind and sympathizing way,
lamenting the severity of the late statute applicable to the case;[23]
and promised to do for him whatever his little skill and experience
_could_ do. He hinted however, that, as Mr. Steggars must be aware, a
_little_ ready money would be required, in order to fee counsel--whereat
Steggars looked very dismal indeed, and knowing the state of his
exchequer, imagined himself already on shipboard, on his way to Botany
Bay. Old Mr. Quirk asked him if he had no friends who would raise a
trifle for a "chum in trouble,"--and on Mr. Steggars answering in the
negative, he observed the enthusiasm of the respectable old gentleman
visibly and rapidly cooling down.

"But I'll tell you what, sir," said poor Steggars, suddenly, "if I
haven't money, I may have _money's worth_ at my command;--I've a little
box, that's at my lodging, which those that catched me knew nothing
of--and in which there is a trifle or two about the families and
fortunes of some of the first folk in the best part of Yorkshire, that
would be precious well worth looking after, to those who know how to
follow up such matters."

Old Quirk hereat pricked up his ears, and asked his young friend how he
got possessed of such secrets.

"Oh fie! fie!" said he, gently, as soon as Steggars had told him the
practices of which I have already put the reader in possession.

"Ah--you may say fie! fie! if you like," quoth Steggars, earnestly; "but
the thing is, not how they were come by, but what can be done with them,
now they're got. For example, there's a certain member of parliament in
Yorkshire, that, high as he may hold his head, has no more right to the
estates that yield him a good ten thousand a-year than I have, but keeps
some folk out of their own, that could pay some other folk a round sum
to be put in the way of getting their own;" and that--intimated the
suffering captive--was only _one_ of the good things he knew of. Here
old Quirk rubbed his chin, hemmed, fidgeted about in his seat, took off
his glasses, wiped them, replaced them; and presently went through that
ceremony again. He then said that he had had the honor of being
concerned for a great number of gentlemen in Mr. Steggars' "present
embarrassed circumstances," but who had always been able to command at
least a five-pound note, at starting, to run a heat for liberty.

"Come, come, old gentleman," quoth Steggars, earnestly, "I don't want to
go over the water before my time, if I can help it, I assure you; and I
see you know the value of what I've got! Such a gentleman as you can
turn every bit of paper I have in my box into a fifty-pound note."

"All this is moonshine, my young friend," said old Quirk, in an
irresolute tone and manner.

"Ah! is it, though? To be able to tell the owner of a fat ten thousand
a-year, that you can spring a mine under his feet at any
moment--eh?--and no one ever know how you came by your knowledge. And if
they wouldn't do what was handsome, couldn't you _get the right
heir_--and wouldn't _that_--Lord! it would make the fortunes of
half-a-dozen of the first houses in the profession!" Old Quirk got a
little excited.

"But mind, sir--you see"--said Steggars, "if I get off, I'm not to be
cut out of the thing altogether--eh? I shall look to be taken into your
employ, and dealt handsomely by"----

"Oh Lord!" exclaimed Quirk, involuntarily--adding quickly, "Yes, yes! to
be sure! only fair; but let us first get you out of your present
difficulty, you know!" Steggars, having first exacted from him a written
promise to use his utmost exertions on his (Steggars') behalf, and
secure him the services of two of the most eminent Old Bailey
counsel--viz. Mr. Bluster and Mr. Slang--gave Mr. Quirk the number of
the house where the precious box was, and a written order to the
landlord to deliver it up to the bearer: after which Mr. Quirk shook him
cordially by the hand, and having quitted the prison, made his way
straight to the house in question, and succeeded in obtaining what he
asked for. He faithfully performed his agreement, with Steggars; for he
retained both Bluster and Slang for him, and got up their briefs with
care: but, alas! although these eminent men exerted all their great
powers, they succeeded not in either bothering the judge, bamboozling
the jury, or browbeating the witnesses, (the principal one of whom was
Mr. Parkinson;) Steggars was found guilty and sentenced to be
transported for fourteen years.[24] Enraged at this issue, he sent a
message the next day to Mr. Quirk, requesting a visit from him. When he
arrived, Steggars, in a very violent tone, demanded that his papers
should be returned to him. 'Twas in vain that Mr. Quirk explained to him
again and again his interesting position with reference to his goods,
chattels, and effects--_i. e._ that, as a convicted felon, he had no
further concern with them, and might dismiss all anxiety on that score
from his mind. Steggars hereat got more furious than before, and
intimated plainly the course he should feel it his duty to pursue--viz.
that, if the papers in question were not given up to him as he desired,
he should at once write off to his late employer, Mr. Parkinson, and
acknowledge how much more he (Steggars) had wronged that gentleman and
his clients, than he supposed of. Old Quirk very feelingly represented
to him that he was at liberty to do anything that he thought calculated
to relieve his excited feelings: and then Mr. Quirk took a final
farewell of his client, wishing him health and happiness.

"I say, Grasp!" said he, in a whisper, to that grim functionary, as soon
as he had secured poor Steggars in his cell, "that bird is a little
ruffled just now--isn't he, think you?"

"Lud, sir, that's the nat'ralist thing in the world, considering"----

"Well--if he should want a letter taken to any one, whatever he may say
to the contrary, you'll send it on to Saffron Hill--eh? Understand?--He
may be injuring himself, you know;" and old Quirk with one hand clasped
the huge arm of Grasp in a familiar way, and with the forefinger of the
other touched his own nose, and then winked his eye.

"All right!" quoth Grasp, and they parted. Within a very few hours'
time, Mr. Quirk received, by the hand of a trusty messenger, from Grasp,
a letter written by Steggars to Mr. Parkinson; a long and eloquent
letter, to the purport and effect which Steggars had intimated. Mr.
Quirk read it with much satisfaction, for it disclosed a truly penitent
feeling, and a desire to undo as much mischief as the writer had done.
He (Mr. Quirk) was not in the least exasperated by certain very plain
terms in which his own name was mentioned; but making all due
allowances, quietly put the letter in the fire as soon as he had read
it. In due time Mr. Steggars, whose health had suffered from close
confinement, caught frequent whiffs of the fresh sea-breeze, having set
out, under most favorable auspices, for Botany Bay; to which distant but
happy place, he had been thus fortunate in early securing an
"_appointment_" for so considerable a portion of his life.

Such, then, were the miserable means by which Mr. Quirk became
acquainted with the exact state of Mr. Aubrey's title; on first becoming
apprised of which, Mr. Gammon either felt, or affected, great repugnance
to taking any part in the affair. He appeared to suffer himself, at
length, however, to be over-persuaded by Quirk into acquiescence; and,
that point gained--having ends in view of which Mr. Quirk had not the
least conception, and which, in fact, had but suddenly occurred to Mr.
Gammon himself--worked his materials with a caution, skill, energy, and
perseverance, which soon led to important results. Guided by the
suggestions of acute and experienced counsel, after much pains and
considerable expense, they had succeeded in discovering that precious
specimen of humanity, Tittlebat Titmouse, who hath already figured so
prominently in this history. When they came to set down on paper the
result of all their researches and inquiries, in order to submit it in
the shape of a case for the opinion of Mr. Mortmain and Mr. Frankpledge,
in the manner described in a former part of this history, it looked
perfect _on paper_, as many a faulty pedigree and abstract of title had
looked before, and will yet look. It was quite possible for even Mr.
Tresayle himself to overlook the defect which had been pointed out by
Mr. Subtle. That which is stated to a conveyancer, as _a fact_--any
particular event, for instance, as of a death, a birth, or a marriage,
at a particular time or place, which the very nature of the case renders
highly probable--he is warranted in assuming to be so. But when the same
statement comes--with quite a different object--under the experienced
eye of a _nisi prius_ lawyer, who knows that he will have to _prove_ his
case, step by step, the aspect of things is soon changed. "De non
_apparentibus_, et de non _existentibus_," saith the law, "eadem est
ratio." The first practitioner in the common law, before whom the case
came, in its roughest and earliest form, in order that he might "lick it
into shape," and "advise generally" preparatory to its "being laid
before counsel," was Mr. Traverse, a young pleader, whom Messrs. Quirk
and Gammon were disposed to take by the hand. He wrote a very showy, but
superficial and delusive opinion; and put the intended _protégé_ of his
clients, as it were by a kind of hop, step, and jump, into possession of
the Yatton estates. Quirk was quite delighted on reading it; but Gammon
shook his head with a somewhat sarcastic smile, and said he would at
once prepare a case for the opinion of Mr. Lynx, whom he had pitched
upon as the junior counsel in any proceedings which might be instituted
in a court of law. Lynx (of whom I shall speak hereafter) was an
experienced, hard-headed, vigilant, and accurate lawyer; the very man
for such a case, requiring, as it did, most patient and minute
examination. With an eye fitted

    "To inspect a mite, not comprehend the heaven,"

he _crawled_, as it were, over a case; and thus, even as one can imagine
that a beetle creeping over the floor of St. Paul's, would detect minute
flaws and fissures invisible to the eye of Sir Christopher Wren himself,
spied out defects which much nobler optics would have overlooked. To
come to plain matter-of-fact, however, I have beside me the original
opinion written by Mr. Lynx; and shall treat the reader to a taste of
it--giving him sufficient to enable him to appreciate the very ticklish
position of affairs with Mr. Titmouse. To make it not altogether
unintelligible, let us suppose the state of the pedigree to be something
like this, (as far as concerns our present purpose:)--

                   (Dreddlington.)
                          |
             +------------+-----------+
             |                        |
  (Harry Dreddlington.)   (Charles Dreddlington.)
                                      |
                      +---------------+--------------+
                      |                              |
          (Stephen Dreddlington.)      (Geoffrey Dreddlington.)
                      |                              |
            =====================           =======================
          (A female descendant             (A female descendant marries
       marries _Gabriel Tittlebat_             CHARLES AUBREY, Esq.,
         Titmouse_, through whom                father of the present
           TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE                       possessor.)
                  claims.)

Be pleased now, unlearned reader, to bear in mind that "_Dreddlington_"
at the top of the above table, is the common ancestor, having two sons,
the elder "_Harry Dreddlington_," the younger "_Charles Dreddlington_;"
the latter having, in like manner, two sons, "_Stephen Dreddlington_"
the elder son, and "_Geoffrey Dreddlington_" the younger son; that Mr.
Aubrey, at present in possession, claims under "_Geoffrey
Dreddlington_." Now it will be incumbent on Mr. Titmouse, in the first
instance, to establish in himself a clear, independent, legal, and
possessory title to the estates; it being sufficient for Mr. Aubrey,
(possession being nine-tenths of the law), to falsify Titmouse's proofs,
or show them defective--"because," saith a very learned sergeant, who
hath writ a text-book upon the Action of Ejectment, "the plaintiff in an
action of ejectment must recover upon the strength of his own title, not
the weakness of his adversary's."[25]

Now, _rebus sic stantibus_, behold the astute Lynx advising (inter alia)
in manner following; that is to say--

"It appears clear that the lessor of the plaintiff (_i. e._ Tittlebat
Titmouse) will be able to prove that Dreddlington (the common ancestor)
was seised of the estate at Yatton in the year 1740; that he had two
sons, Harry and Charles, the former of whom, after a life of
dissipation, appears to have died without issue; and that from the
latter (Charles) are descended Stephen, the ancestor of the lessor of
the plaintiff, and Geoffrey, the ancestor of the defendant. Assuming,
therefore, that the descent of the lessor of the plaintiff from Stephen
can be made out, as there appears every reason to expect, [on this point
Lynx had written two brief pages,] a clear _primâ facie_ case will have
been established on the part of the lessor of the plaintiff. As,
however, it is suspected that Harry Dreddlington executed a conveyance
in fee of the property, in order to secure the loan contracted by him
from Aaron Moses, it will be extremely important to ascertain, and, if
possible, procure satisfactory evidence that the decease of Harry
Dreddlington occurred before the period at which, by his father's death,
that conveyance could have become operative upon the property: since it
is obvious that, should he have survived his father, _that instrument,
being outstanding_, may form a complete answer to the case of the
lessor of the plaintiff.[26] The danger will be obviously increased
should the debt to Aaron Moses prove to have been paid off, (as it is
stated was rumored to have been the fact,) by Geoffrey Dreddlington, the
younger son of Charles Dreddlington; for, should that turn out to be the
case, he would probably have taken a conveyance to himself, or to
trustees for his benefit, from Aaron Moses--which being in the power of
the defendant, Mr. Aubrey, would enable him to make out a title to the
property, paramount to that now attempted to be set up on behalf of Mr.
Titmouse. Every possible exertion, therefore, should be made to
ascertain the precise period of the death of Harry Dreddlington. The
registries of the various parishes in which the family may have at any
time resided should be carefully searched; and an examination made in
the churches and churchyards, of all tombstones, escutcheons, etc.,
belonging, or supposed to belong, to the Dreddlington family, and by
which any light can be thrown upon this most important point. It appears
clear that Dreddlington (the common ancestor) died on the 7th August,
1742:--the question, therefore, simply is, _whether the death of his
eldest son (Harry) took place prior or subsequent to that period_. It is
to be feared that the defendant may be in possession of some better and
more direct evidence on this point than is attainable by the lessor of
the plaintiff. The natural presumption would certainly seem to be that
the son, being the younger and stronger man, was the survivor."[27]

The above-mentioned opinion of Mr. Lynx, together with that of Mr.
Subtle entirely corroborating it, (and which was alluded to in a late
chapter of this history,[28]) and a pedigree, were lying on the table,
one day, at the office at Saffron Hill, before the anxious and perplexed
partners, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon.

Gammon was looking attentively, and with a very chagrined air, at the
pedigree; and Quirk was looking at Gammon.

"Now, Gammon," said the former, "just let me see again where the exact
hitch is--eh? You'll think me perhaps infernally stupid, but--curse me
if I can see it!"

"See it, my dear sir? Here, _here_!" replied Gammon, with sudden
impatience, putting his finger two or three times to the words "_Harry
D._"

"Lord bless us! Don't be so sharp with one, Gammon! I know as well as
you that that's _about_ where the crack is; but what is the precise
thing we're in want of, eh?"

"Proof, my dear sir," replied Gammon, somewhat impatiently, but with a
smile, "of the death of Harry Dreddlington some time--no matter
when--previous to the 7th August, 1742; and in default thereof, Mr.
Quirk, we are all flat on our backs, and had better never have stirred
in the business!"

"You know, Gammon, you're better _up_ in these matters than I--(because
I've not been able to turn my particular attention to 'em since I first
began business)--so just tell me, in a word, what good's to be got by
showing that fellow to have died in his father's lifetime?"

"You don't show your usual acuteness, Mr. Quirk," replied Gammon,
blandly. "It is to make waste paper of that confounded conveyance which
he executed, and which Mr. Aubrey doubtless has, and with which he may,
at a stroke, cut the ground from under our feet!"

"The very thought makes one feel quite funny--don't it, Gammon?" quoth
Quirk, with a flustered air.

"It may well do so, Mr. Quirk. Now we _are_ fairly embarked in a cause
where success will be attended with so many splendid results, Mr.
Quirk--though I'm sure you'll always bear me out in saying how very
unwilling I was to take advantage of the villany of that miscreant
Steg--hem"----

"Gammon, Gammon, you're always harking back to that--I'm tired of
hearing on't!" interrupted Quirk, angrily, but with an embarrassed air.

"Well, now we're in it," said Gammon, with a sigh, and shrugging his
shoulders, "I don't see why we should allow ourselves to be baffled by
trifles. The plain question is, undoubtedly, whether we are to stand
still--_or go on_." Mr. Quirk gazed at Mr. Gammon with an anxious and
puzzled look.

"How d'ye make out--in a legal way, you know, Gammon--_when_ a man
died--I mean, of a _natural_ death?" somewhat mysteriously inquired
Quirk, who was familiar enough with the means of proving the exact hour
of certain _violent_ deaths at Debtor's Door.

"Oh! there are various methods of doing so, my dear sir," replied
Gammon, carelessly. "Entries in family Bibles and
prayer-books--registers--tombstones--ay, by the way, AN OLD TOMBSTONE,"
continued Gammon, musingly, "that would settle the business!"

"An old tombstone!" echoed Quirk, briskly, but suddenly dropping his
voice. "Lord, Gammon, so it would! That's an _idea_!--I call that a
decided idea, Gammon. 'Twould be the very thing!"

"The very thing!" repeated Gammon, pointedly. They remained silent for
some moments.

"Snap could not have looked about him sharply enough when he was down at
Yatton--could he, Gammon?" at length observed Quirk, in a low tone,
flushing all over as he uttered the last words, and felt Gammon's cold
gray eye settled on him like that of a snake.

"He could not, indeed, my dear sir," replied Gammon, while Quirk
continued gazing earnestly at him, now and then wriggling about in his
chair, rubbing his chin, and drumming with his fingers on the
table.--"And now that you've suggested the thing, [oh, Gammon!
Gammon]--it's not to be wondered at!--You know, it would have been an
old tombstone--a sort of fragment of a tombstone, perhaps--so deeply
sunk in the ground, probably, as easily to have escaped observation.
Eh?--Does not it strike _you_ so, Mr. Quirk?" All this was said by
Gammon in a musing manner, and in a very low tone of voice; and he was
delighted to find his words sinking into the eager and fertile mind of
his companion.

"Ah, Gammon!" exclaimed Quirk, with a sound of partly a sigh, and partly
a whistle, (the former being the exponent of the _true_ state of his
feelings, _i. e._ anxiety--the latter of what he wished to _appear_ the
state of his feelings, _i. e._ indifference.)

"Yes, Mr. Quirk?"

"You're a deep devil, Gammon--I _will_ say that for you!" replied Quirk,
glancing towards each door, and, as it were, unconsciously drawing his
chair a little closer to that of Gammon.

"Nay, my dear sir!" said Gammon, with a deferential and deprecating
smile, "you give me credit for an acuteness I feel I do not possess! If,
indeed, I had not had _your_ sagacity to rely upon, ever since I have
had the honor of being connected with you in business---- ah, Mr. Quirk,
you know you lead--I follow"----

"Gammon, Gammon!" interrupted Quirk, with an uncomfortable, but still a
mollified air, "Come--your name's _Oily_"----

"In moments like these, Mr. Quirk, I say nothing that I do not feel,"
interrupted Gammon, gravely, putting to his nose the least modicum of
snuff which he could take with the tip of his finger out of the huge box
of Mr. Quirk, who, just then, was thrusting immense pinches, every half
minute, up his nostrils.

"It will cost a great deal of money to find that same tombstone,
Gammon!" said Quirk, in almost a whisper, and paused, looking intently
at Gammon.

"I think this is a different kind of snuff from that which you usually
take, Mr. Quirk, isn't it?" inquired Gammon, as he inserted the tips of
his fingers a second time into the mechanically proffered box of Mr.
Quirk.

"The same--the same," replied Quirk, hastily.

"You are a man better fitted for serious emergencies, Mr. Quirk, than
any man I ever came near," said Gammon, deferentially; "I perceive that
you have hit the nail on the head, as indeed you _always_ do!"

"Tut! Stuff, Gammon; you're every bit as good a hand as I am!" replied
Quirk, with an evident mixture of pleasure and embarrassment. Gammon
smiled, shook his head, and shrugged his shoulders.

"'Tis that practical sagacity of yours, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon--"you
know it as well as I can tell you--that has raised you to your present
professional eminence!" He paused, and looked very sincerely at his
senior partner.

"Well, I must own I think I _do_ know a trick or two," quoth Quirk, with
a sort of _grunt_ of gratification.

"Ay, and further, there are _some_ clever men who never can keep their
own counsel; but are like a hen that has just laid an egg, and directly
she has risen, goes foolishly cackling about everywhere, and then her
egg is taken away; but _you_"----

"Ha, ha!" laughed Quirk; "that's _devilish_ good, Gammon!--Capital! Gad,
I think I see the hen! Ha, ha!"

"Ha, ha!" echoed Gammon, gently. "But to be serious, Mr. Quirk; what I
was going to say was, that I thoroughly appreciate your admirable
caution in not confiding to any one--no, not even to me--the exact
means by which you intend to extricate us from our present dilemma."
Here Quirk got very fidgety, and twirled his watch-key violently.

"Hem! But--hem! Ay--a--a," he grunted, looking with an uneasy air at his
calm astute companion; "I didn't mean so much as all _that_, either,
Gammon; for two heads, in my opinion, are better than one. You _must_
own that, Gammon!" said he, not at all relishing the heavy burden of
responsibility which he felt that Gammon was about to devolve upon his
(Quirk's) shoulders exclusively.

"'Tis undoubtedly rather a serious business on which we are now
entering," said Gammon; "and I have always admired a saying which you
years ago told me of that great man Machiavel"----

[Oh, Gammon! Gammon! You well know that poor old Mr. Quirk never heard
of the name of that same Machiavel till this moment!]--

"That 'when great affairs are stirring, a master-move should be confined
to the master-mind that projects it.' I understand! I see! I will not,
therefore, inquire into the precise means by which I am satisfied you
will make it appear, in due time (while I am engaged getting up the
subordinate, but very harassing details of the general case), that
_Harry Dreddlington died_ BEFORE _the 7th of August, 1742_." Here,
taking out his watch, he suddenly added--"Bless me, Mr. Quirk, how time
passes!--Two o'clock! I ought to have been at Messrs. Gregson's a
quarter of an hour ago."

"Stop--a moment or two can't signify! It--it," said Quirk, hesitatingly,
"it was _you_, wasn't it, that thought of the tombstone?"

"I, my dear Mr. Quirk"--interrupted Gammon, with a look of astonishment
and deference.

"Come, come--honor among thieves, you know, Gammon!" said Quirk, trying
to laugh.

"No--it shall never be said that I attempted to take the credit of"----
commenced Gammon; when a clerk entering, put an end to the colloquy
between the partners, each of whom, presently, was sitting alone in his
own room--for Gammon found that he was too late to think of keeping his
engagement with Messrs. Gregson; if indeed he had ever made any--which,
in fact, he had _not_. Mr. Quirk sat in a musing posture for nearly half
an hour after he and Gammon had separated. "Gammon _is_ a deep one! I'll
be shot if ever there was his equal," said Quirk to himself, at length;
and starting off his chair, with his hands crossed behind him, he walked
softly to and fro. "I know what he's driving at--though he thought I
didn't! He'd let me scratch my hands in getting the blackberries, and
then he'd come smiling in to eat 'em! But--share and share alike--share
profit, share danger, master Gammon;--you may find that Caleb Quirk is a
match for Oily Gammon--I'll have you in for it, one way or another!"
Here occurred a long pause in his thoughts, "Really I doubt the thing's
growing unmanageable--the prize can't be worth the risk!--_Risk_,
indeed--'fore gad--it's neither more nor less than"---- Here a certain
picture hanging, covered with black crape, in the drawing-room at Alibi
House, seemed to have glided down from its station, and to be hanging
close before his eyes, with the crape drawn aside--a ghastly object---
eugh! He shuddered, and involuntarily closed his eyes. "How devilish odd
that I should just _now_ have happened to think of it!" he inwardly
exclaimed, sinking into his chair in a sort of cold sweat.

"D--n the picture!" at length said he aloud--getting more and more
flustered--"I'll burn it! It sha'n't disgrace my drawing-room any
longer!" Here Quirk almost fancied that some busy little fiend sat
squatting before the grisly picture, writing the words "CALEB QUIRK" at
the bottom of it; and a sort of sickness came over him for a moment.
Presently he started up, and took down one of several well-worn
dingy-looking books standing on the shelves--a volume of Burns' Justice.
Resuming his seat, he put on his glasses, and with a little trepidation
turned to the head "Forgery," and glanced over it, divided as it was
into two great heads--"Forgery at _Common Law_, and Forgery _by
Statute_," with many able observations of the learned compiler, and
important "_cases_" cited. At length his eye lit upon a paragraph which
seemed suddenly to draw his heart up into his throat, producing a
sensation which made him involuntarily clap his hand upon his neck.

"Oh, Gammon!!" he muttered, drawing off his glasses, sinking back in his
chair, and looking towards the door which opened into Gammon's room;
extending at the same time, in that direction, his right arm, and
shaking his fist. "You _precious_ villain!--I've an uncommon
inclination," at length thought he, "to go down slap to Yorkshire--say
nothing to anybody--make peace with the enemy, and knock up the whole
thing!--For a couple of thousand pounds--a trifle to the Aubreys, I'm
sure. Were _I_ in his place, I shouldn't grudge it; and why should
he?--By Jove," he got a little heated--"that _would_ be, as Gammon has
it, a master-move! and confined, egad! to the master-mind that thought
of it!--Why should he ever know of the way in which the thing blew
up?--Really, 'twould be worth half the money to _do_ Gammon so hollow
for once--by George it would!--Gammon, that would slip Caleb Quirk's
neck so slyly into the halter, indeed!"

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, suddenly re-entering the
room after about an hour's absence, during which he too had, like his
senior partner, been revolving many things in his mind--"it has occurred
to me, that I had better immediately go down to Yatton, _alone_."

Hereat Mr. Quirk opened both his eyes and his mouth to their very
widest; got very red in the face; and stared at his placid partner with
a mingled expression of fear and wonder. "Hang me, Gammon!" at length he
exclaimed desperately, slapping his fist upon the table--"if I don't
think you're the very devil himself!"--and he sank back in his chair,
verily believing, in the momentary confusion of his thoughts, that what
had been passing through his mind was known to Gammon; or that what had
been passing through his (Quirk's) mind, had also been occurring to
Gammon, who had resolved upon being beforehand in putting his purposes
into execution. Gammon was at first completely confounded by Quirk's
reception of him, and stood for a few moments, with his hands elevated,
in silence. Then he approached the table, and his eye caught the
well-thumbed volume of Burns' Justice, open at the head "FORGERY!" and
the quicksighted Gammon saw how matters stood at a glance--the process
by which the result he had just witnessed had been arrived at.

"Well, Mr. Quirk, what new vagary now?" he inquired with an air of
smiling curiosity.

"Vagary be----!" growled old Quirk, sullenly, without moving in his
chair.

Gammon stood for a moment or two eying him with a keen scrutiny. "What!"
at length he inquired good-humoredly, "do you then really grudge me any
share in the little enterprise?"

"Eh?" quickly interrupted Quirk, pricking up his ears. "Do you intend to
play _Mackivel_! eh? What must you go down alone to Yatton for, Gammon?"
continued Quirk, anxiously.

"Why, simply as a sort of pioneer--to reconnoitre the churchyard--eh? I
thought it might have been of service; but if"--

"Gammon, Gammon, your hand! I understand," replied Quirk, evidently
vastly relieved--most cordially shaking the cold hand of Gammon.

"But understand, Mr. Quirk," said he, in a very peremptory manner, "no
one upon earth is to know of my visit to Yatton except yourself."

He received a solemn pledge to that effect; and presently the partners
separated, a little better satisfied with each other. Though not a word
passed between them for several days afterwards on the topic chiefly
discussed during the interview above described, the reader may easily
imagine that neither of them dropped it from his thoughts. Mr. Quirk,
shortly afterwards, paid one or two visits to the neighborhood of
Houndsditch, (a perfect hotbed of clients to the firm,) where resided
two or three gentlemen of the Jewish persuasion, who had been placed,
from time to time, under considerable obligations by the firm of Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, in respect of professional services rendered both to
themselves and to their friends. One of them, in particular, had a
painful consciousness that it was in old Mr. Quirk's power at any time
by a whisper to place his--the aforesaid Israelite's--neck in an
unsightly noose which every now and then might be seen dangling from a
beam opposite Debtor's Door, Newgate, about eight o'clock in the
morning; him, therefore, every consideration of interest and of
gratitude combined to render subservient to the reasonable wishes of Mr.
Quirk. He was a most ingenious little fellow, and had a great taste for
the imitative arts--so strong in fact, that it had once or twice placed
him in some jeopardy with the Goths and Vandals of the law; who
characterized the noble art in which he excelled, by a very ugly and
formidable word, and annexed the most barbarous penalties to its
practice. What passed between him and old Quirk on the occasion of their
interviews, I know not; but one afternoon, the latter, on returning to
his office, without saying anything to anybody, having bolted the door,
took out of his pocket several little pieces of paper, containing pretty
little picturesque devices of a fragmentary character, with antique
letters and figures on them--crumbling pieces of stone, some looking
more and some less sunk in the ground, and overgrown with grass;
possibly they were designs for ornaments to be added to that tasteful
structure, Alibi House--possibly intended to grace Miss Quirk's album.
However this might be, after he had looked at them, and carefully
compared them one with another, for some time, he folded them up in a
sheet of paper, sealed it--with certainly not the steadiest hand in the
world--and then deposited it in an iron safe.




CHAPTER XIII.


Yatton, the recovery of which was the object of these secret and
formidable movements and preparations, not to say machinations, was all
this while the scene of deep affliction. The lamentable condition of his
mother plunged Mr. Aubrey, his wife, and sister, into profounder grief
than had been occasioned by the calamity which menaced them all in
common. Had he been alone, he would have encountered the sudden storm of
adversity with unshrinking, nay, cheerful firmness; but could it be so,
when he had ever before him those whose ruin was involved in his
own?--Poor Mrs. Aubrey, his wife, having been two or three weeks
confined to her bed, during which time certain fond hopes of her husband
had been blighted, was almost overpowered, when, languid and feeble,
supported by Mr. Aubrey and Kate, she first entered the bedroom of the
venerable sufferer. What a difference, indeed, was there between the
appearance of all of them at that moment, and on the Christmas day when,
a happy group, they were cheerfully enjoying the festivities of the
season! Kate was now pale, and somewhat thinner; her beautiful features
exhibited a careworn expression; yet there was a serene lustre in her
blue eye, and a composed resolution in her air, which bespoke the
superiority of her soul. What had it not cost her to bear with any
semblance of self-possession, or fortitude, the sad spectacle now
presented by her mother! What a tender and vigilant nurse was she, to
one who could no longer be sensible of, or appreciate her attentions!
How that sweet girl humored all her venerated and suffering parent's
little eccentricities and occasional excitement, and accommodated
herself to every varying phasis of her mental malady! She had so
schooled her sensibilities and feelings, as to be able to maintain
perfect cheerfulness and composure in her mother's presence, on
occasions which forced her brother to turn aside with an eye of
agony--overcome by some touching speech or wayward action of the
unconscious sufferer, who constantly imagined herself, poor soul! to be
living over again her early married life; and that in her little
grandchildren she beheld Mr. Aubrey and Kate as in their childhood! She
would gently chide Mr. Aubrey, her husband, for his prolonged absence,
asking many times a day whether he had returned from London. Every
morning old Jacob Jones was shown into her chamber, at the hour at which
he had been accustomed, in happier days, to attend upon her. The
faithful old man's eyes would be blinded with tears, and his voice
choked, as he was asked how Peggy got over her yesterday's journey; and
listened to questions, messages, and directions, which had been familiar
to him twenty years before, about villagers and tenants who had long
lain mouldering in their humble graves--their way thither cheered and
smoothed by Mrs. Aubrey's Christian charity and benevolence! 'Twas a
touching sight to see her two beautiful grandchildren, in whose company
she delighted, brought, with a timorous and half-reluctant air, into her
presence. How strange must have seemed to them the cheerfulness of the
motionless figure always lying in the bed; a cheerfulness which, though
gentle as gentle could be, yet sufficed not to assure the little things,
or set them at their ease. Though her mild features ever smiled upon
them, still 'twas from a prostrate figure, which never moved, and was
always surrounded by mournful persons, with sorrowful constraint in
their countenances and gestures! Charles would stand watching her, with
apprehensive eye--the finger of one hand raised to his lip, while his
other retained the hand which had brought him in, as if fearful of its
quitting hold of him; the few words he could be brought to speak were in
a subdued tone and hurried utterance;--and when, having been lifted up
to kiss his grandmamma, he and his sister were taken out of the chamber,
their little breasts would heave a sigh which showed how sensibly they
were relieved from their recent constraint!

How wofully changed was everything in the once cheerful old Hall! Mr.
Aubrey sitting in the library, intently engaged upon books and
papers--Mrs. Aubrey and Kate now and then, arm in arm, walking slowly up
and down the galleries, or one of the rooms, or the hall, not with their
former sprightly gayety, but pensive, and often in tears, and then
returning to the chamber of their suffering parent. All this was sad
work, indeed, and seemed, as it were, to herald coming desolation!

But little variation occurred, for several weeks, in the condition of
Mrs. Aubrey, except that she grew visibly feebler. One morning, however,
about six weeks after her seizure, from certain symptoms, the medical
men intimated their opinion that some important change was on the eve of
taking place, for which they prepared the family. She had been very
restless during the night. After frequent intervals of uneasy sleep, she
would awake with evident surprise and bewilderment. Sometimes a peculiar
smile would flit over her emaciated features; at others, they would be
overcast with gloom, and she would seem struggling to suppress tears.
Her voice, too, when she spoke, was feeble and tremulous; and she would
sigh, and shake her head mournfully. Old Jacob Jones, not being
introduced at the accustomed hour, she asked for him. When he made his
appearance, she gazed at him for a moment or two, with a perplexed eye,
exclaiming, "Jacob! Jacob! is it you?" in a very low tone; and then she
closed her eyes, apparently falling asleep. Thus passed the day; her
daughter and daughter-in-law sitting on either side of the bed, where
they had so long kept their anxious and affectionate vigils--Mr. Aubrey
sitting at the foot of the bed--and Dr. Goddart and Mr. Whately in
frequent attendance. Towards the evening, Dr. Tatham also, as had been
his daily custom through her illness, appeared, and in a low tone read
over the service for the visitation of the sick. Shortly afterwards Mr.
Aubrey was obliged to quit the chamber, in order to attend to some very
pressing matters of business; and he had been engaged for nearly an
hour, intending almost every moment to return to his mother's chamber,
when Dr. Tatham entered, as Mr. Aubrey was subscribing his name to a
letter, and, with a little earnestness, said--"Come, my friend, let us
return to your mother; methinks she is on the eve of some decisive
change: the issue is with God!" Within a very few moments they were both
at the bedside of Mrs. Aubrey. A large chamber-lamp, standing on a table
at the farther end of the room, diffused a soft light, rendering visible
at a glance the silent and sad group collected round the bed, all with
their eyes directed towards the venerable figure who lay upon it. Mr.
Aubrey sat beside his wife close to his mother; and taking her white
emaciated hand into his own, gently raised it to his lips. She seemed
dozing: but his action appeared to rouse her for a moment. Presently she
fixed her eye upon him--its expression, the while, slowly but
perceptibly changing, and exciting strange feelings within him. He
trembled, and removed not his eye from hers. He turned very pale--for
the whole expression of his mother's countenance, which was turned full
towards him, was changing. Through the clouded windows of the falling
fabric, behold! its long-imprisoned tenant, THE SOUL, had arisen from
its torpor, and was looking at him. Reason was re-appearing. It was,
indeed, his mother, and _in her right mind_, that was gazing at him. He
scarcely breathed. At length surprise and apprehension yielded before a
gush of tenderness and love. With what an unutterable look was his
mother at that moment regarding him! His lip quivered--his eye
overflowed--and, as he felt her fingers very gently compressing his own,
his tears fell down. Gently leaning forward, he kissed her cheek, and
sank on one knee beside the bed.

"Is it you, my son?" said she, in a very low tone, but in _her own_
voice, and it stirred up instantly a thousand fond recollections, almost
overpowering him. He kissed her hand with fervent energy, but spoke not.
She continued gazing at him with mingled solemnity and fondness. Her eye
seemed brightening as it remained fixed upon him. Again she spoke, in a
very low but clear voice--every thrilling word being heard by all around
her: "Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken,
or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the
cistern,--Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it." It would be in vain to
attempt to describe the manner in which these words were spoken; and
which fell upon those who heard them as though they were listening to
one from the dead.

"My mother!--my mother!" at length faltered Aubrey.

"God bless thee, my son!" said she, solemnly. "And Catherine, my
daughter--God bless thee"---- she presently added, gently turning round
her head towards the quarter whence a stifled sob issued from Miss
Aubrey, who rose, trembling, and leaning over, kissed her mother.
"Agnes, are you here--and your little ones?--God bless"---- Her voice
got fainter, and her eyes closed. Mr. Whately gave her a few drops of
ether, and she presently revived.

"God hath been very good to you, Madam," said Dr. Tatham, observing her
eye fixed upon him, "to restore you thus to your children."

"I have been long absent--long!--I wake, my children, but to bid you
farewell, forever, upon earth."

"Say not so, my mother--my precious mother!" exclaimed her son, in vain
endeavoring to suppress his emotions.

"I do, my son! Weep not for me; I am old, and am summoned away from
among you"--She ceased, as if from exhaustion; and no one spoke for some
minutes.

"It may be that God hath roused me, as it were, from the dead, to
comfort my sorrowful children with words of hope," said Mrs. Aubrey,
with much more power and distinctness than before. "Hope ye, then, in
God; for ye shall yet praise him who is the health of your countenance,
and your God!"

"We will remember, my mother, your words!" faltered her son.

"Yes, my son--if days of darkness be at hand"--She ceased. Again Mr.
Whately placed to her white lips a glass with some reviving
fluid--looking ominously at Mr. Aubrey, as he found that she continued
insensible. Miss Aubrey sobbed audibly; indeed all present were
powerfully affected. Again Mrs. Aubrey revived, and swallowed a few
drops of wine and water. A heavenly serenity diffused itself over her
emaciated features.

"We shall meet again, my loves!--I can no longer see you with the eyes
of"--Mr. Whately observing a sudden change, came nearer to her.

"Peace! peace!" she murmured almost inarticulately. A dead silence
ensued, interrupted only by smothered sobs. Her children sank on their
knees, and buried their faces in their hands, trembling.

Mr. Whately made a silent signal to Dr. Tatham, that life had
ceased--that the beloved spirit had passed away. "The Lord gave, and the
Lord hath taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord!" said Dr. Tatham,
with tremulous solemnity. Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey, no longer able to
restrain their feelings, wept bitterly; and overpowered with grief, were
supported out of the room by Dr. Tatham and Mr. Aubrey.

As soon as it was known that this venerable lady was no more, universal
reverence was testified for her memory, and sympathy for the afflicted
survivors, by even those, high and low, in the remoter parts of the
neighborhood who had no personal acquaintance with the family. Two or
three days afterwards, the undertaker, who had received orders from Mr.
Aubrey to provide a simple and inexpensive funeral, submitted to him a
list of more than thirty names of the nobility and gentry of the
country, who had sent to him to know whether it would be agreeable to
the family for them to be allowed to attend Mrs. Aubrey's remains to the
grave. After much consideration, Mr. Aubrey accepted this spontaneous
tribute of respect to the memory of his mother. 'Twas a memorable and
melancholy day on which the interment took place--one never to be
forgotten at Yatton. What can be more chilling than the gloomy bustle of
a great funeral, especially in the country; and when the deceased is one
whose memory is enshrined in the holiest feelings of all who knew her?
What person was there, for miles around, who could not speak of the
courtesies, the charities, the goodness of Madam Aubrey?

     "_When the ear heard her, then it blessed her; and when the eye saw
     her, it gave witness to her:_

     _"Because she delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless,
     and him that had none to help him_.

     _"The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon her, and
     she caused the widow's heart to sing for joy_.

     _"She was eyes to the blind, and feet was she to the lame_.

     _"She was a mother to the poor_."----

Pale as death, the chief mourner, wrapped in his black cloak, is
stepping into the mourning-coach. No one speaks to him; his face is
buried in his handkerchief; his heart seems breaking. He thinks of her
whose dear dust is before him;--then of the beloved beings whom he has
left alone in their agony till his return--his wife and sister. The
procession is moving slowly on--long, silent rows of the tenantry and
villagers, old and young, male and female--not a dry eye among them, nor
a syllable spoken--stand on each side of the way; no sound heard but of
horses' feet, and wheels crushing along the wet gravel--for the day is
most gloomy and inclement. As they quit the gates, carriage after
carriage follows in the rear; and the sorrowful crowd increases around
them. Many have in their hands the Bibles and prayer-books which had
been given them by her who now lies in yonder hearse; and a few can
recollect the day when the late lord of Yatton led her along from the
church to the Hall, his young and blooming bride--in pride and joy--and
they are now going to lay her beside him again! They are met at the
entrance of the little churchyard, by good Dr. Tatham, in his surplice,
bareheaded, and with book in hand; with full eye and quivering lip he
slowly precedes the body into the church. His voice frequently trembles,
and sometimes he pauses while reading the service. Now they are standing
bareheaded at the vault's mouth--the last sad rites are being performed;
and probably, as is thinking the chief mourner, over the last of his
race who will rest in that tomb!

Long after the solemn ceremony was over, the little churchyard remained
filled with mournful groups of villagers and tenants, who pressed
forward to the dark mouth of the vault, to take their last look at the
coffin which contained the remains of her whose memory would live long
in all their hearts. "Ah, dear old Madam," quoth Jonas Higgs to himself,
as he finished his dreary day's labors, by temporarily closing up the
mouth of the vault, "they might have turned thee, by-and-by, out of
yonder Hall, but they shall not touch thee _here_!"

Thus died, and was buried, Madam Aubrey; _and she is not yet forgotten_.

How desolate seemed the Hall, the next morning, to the bereaved inmates,
as, dressed in deep mourning, they met at the cheerless breakfast-table!
Aubrey kissed his wife and sister--who could hardly answer his brief
inquiries. The gloom occasioned throughout the Hall, for the last ten
days, by the windows being constantly darkened--now that the blinds were
drawn up--had given way to a staring light and distinctness, which
almost startled and offended the eyes of those whose hearts were dark
with sorrow as ever. Every object reminded them of the absence of
_one_--whose chair stood empty in its accustomed place. There, also, was
her Bible, on the little round table near the window! The mourners
seemed relieved by the entrance, by-and-by, of the children; but they
also were in mourning! Let us, however, withdraw from this scene of
suffering, where every object, every recollection, every association,
causes the wounded heart to bleed afresh.

Great troubles seem coming upon them; and now that _they have buried
their dead out of their sight_, and when time shall have begun to pour
his balm into their present smarting wounds, I doubt not that they will
look those troubles in the face, calmly and with fortitude, not
forgetful of the last words of her for whom they now mourn so bitterly,
and whom, beloved and venerable being! God hath mercifully taken away
from evil days that are to come.

After much consideration, they resolved to go, on the ensuing Sunday
morning, to church, where neither Mrs. Aubrey nor Kate had been since
the illness of her mother. The little church was crowded; almost every
one present, besides wearing a saddened countenance, exhibited some
outward mark of respect, in their dress--some badge of mourning--such as
their little means admitted of. The pulpit and reading-desk were hung in
black, as also was Mr. Aubrey's pew--an object of deep interest to the
congregation, who expected to see at least _some_ member of the family
at the Hall. They were not disappointed. A little before Dr. Tatham took
his place in the reading-desk, the well-known sound of the
family-carriage wheels was heard as it drew up before the gate; and
presently Mr. Aubrey appeared at the church door, with his wife and
sister on either arm; all of them, of course, in the deepest
mourning--Mrs. and Miss Aubrey's countenances concealed beneath their
long crape veils. For some time after taking their seats, they seemed
oppressed with emotion, evidently weeping. Mr. Aubrey, however,
exhibited great composure, though his countenance bore traces of the
suffering he had undergone. Mrs. Aubrey seldom rose from her seat; but
Kate stood up, from time to time, with the rest of the congregation; her
white handkerchief, however, might have been seen frequently raised to
her eyes, beneath her black veil. As the service went on, she seemed to
have struggled with some success against her feelings. To relieve
herself for a moment from its oppressive closeness, she gently drew
aside her veil; and thus, for a few minutes, exhibited a countenance
which, though pale and agitated, was inexpressibly beautiful. She could
not, however, long bear to face a congregation, every one of whom she
felt to be looking on her, and those beside her, with affectionate
sympathy; and rather quickly drew down her veil, without again removing
it. There was one person present, on whom the brief glimpse of her
beauty had produced a sudden, deep, and indelible impression. As he
gazed at her, the color gradually deserted his cheek; and his eye
remained fixed upon her, even after she had drawn down her veil. He
experienced emotions such as he had never known before. _So that was
Miss Aubrey!_

Mr. Gammon--for he it was, and he had gone thither under the expectation
of seeing, for the first time, some of the Aubrey family--generally
passed for a cold-blooded person; and in fact few men living had more
control over their feelings, or more systematically checked any
manifestations of them; but there was something in the person and
circumstances of Miss Aubrey--for by a hurried inquiry of the person
next to him he learned that it was she--which excited new feelings in
him. Her slightest motion his eye watched with intense eagerness; and
faint half-formed schemes, purposes, and hopes, passed in rapid
confusion through his mind, as he foresaw that circumstances would
hereafter arise by means of which--

"Good heavens! how very--_very_ beautiful she is!" said he to himself,
as, the service over, her graceful figure, following her brother and his
wife with slow sad step, approached the pew in which he was standing, on
her way to the door. He felt a sort of cold shudder as her black dress
rustled past, actually touching him. What was he doing and meditating
against that lovely being? And for whom--disgusting reptile!--for
Titmouse? He almost blushed from a conflict of emotions, as he followed
almost immediately after Miss Aubrey, never losing sight of her till
her brother, having handed her into the carriage, got in after her, and
they drove off towards the Hall.

The reader will not be at a loss to account for the presence of Mr.
Gammon on this occasion, nor to connect it with an impending trial at
the approaching York assizes. As he walked back to Grilston to his
solitary dinner, he was lost in thought; and on arriving at the inn,
repaired at once to his room, where he found a copy of the _Sunday
Flash_, which had, according to orders, been sent to him from town,
under his assumed name, "Gibson." He ate but little, and that
mechanically; and seemed to feel, for once, little or no interest in his
newspaper. He had never paid the least attention to the _eulogia_ upon
Miss Aubrey of the idiot Titmouse, nor of Snap, of whom he entertained
but a very little higher opinion than of Titmouse. One thing was clear,
that from that moment Miss Aubrey formed a new element in Mr. Gammon's
calculations; and for aught I know, may occasion very different results
from those originally contemplated by that calm and crafty person.

As it proved a moonlight night, he resolved at once to set about the
important business which had brought him into Yorkshire; and for that
purpose set off about eight o'clock on his walk to Yatton. About ten
o'clock he might have been seen gliding noiselessly into the churchyard,
like a dangerous snake. The moon continued to shine--and at intervals
with brightness sufficient for his purpose, which was simply to
reconnoitre, as closely as possible, the little sequestered locality--to
ascertain what it might contain, and _what were its capabilities_. At
length he approached the old yew-tree, against the huge trunk of which
he leaned with folded arms, apparently in a revery. Hearing a noise as
of some one opening the gate by which he had entered, he glided farther
into the gloom behind him; and turning his head in the direction whence
the sound came, he beheld some one entering the churchyard. His heart
beat quickly; and he suspected that he had been watched: yet there was
surely no harm in being seen, at ten o'clock at night, looking about him
in a country churchyard!--It was a gentleman who entered, dressed in
deep mourning; and Gammon quickly recognized in him Mr. Aubrey--the
brother of her whose beautiful image still shone before his mind's eye.
What could he be wanting there?--at that time of night? Gammon was not
kept long in doubt; for the stranger slowly bent his steps towards a
large high tomb, in fact the central object, next to the yew-tree, in
the churchyard--and stood gazing at it in silence for some time.

"That is, no doubt, where Mrs. Aubrey was buried the other day," thought
Gammon, watching the movements of the stranger, who presently raised his
handkerchief to his eyes, and for some moments seemed indulging in great
grief. Gammon distinctly heard the sound of deep sighing. "He must have
been very fond of her," thought Gammon. "Well, if we succeed, the
excellent old lady will have escaped a great deal of trouble--that's
all! _If we succeed_," he inwardly repeated after a long pause! That
reminded him of what he had for a few moments lost sight of, namely, his
own object in coming thither; and he felt a sudden chill of remorse,
which increased upon him till he almost trembled, as his eye continued
fixed on Mr. Aubrey, and he thought also of Miss Aubrey--and the
misery--the utter ruin into which he was seeking to plunge them
both--the unhallowed means which they--which--if
necessary--he--contemplated resorting to for that purpose.

Gammon's condition was becoming every moment more serious; for VIRTUE,
in the shape of Miss Aubrey, began to shine momentarily in more and more
radiant loveliness before him--and he almost felt an inclination to
sacrifice every person connected with the enterprise in which he was
engaged, if it would give him a chance of winning the favor of Miss
Aubrey. Presently, however, Mr. Aubrey, evidently heaving a deep sigh,
bent his steps slowly back towards the old gate, and quitted the
churchyard. Gammon watched his figure out of sight, and then, for the
first time since Mr. Aubrey's appearance, breathed freely. Relieved from
the pressure of his presence, Gammon began to take calmer and juster
views of his position; and he reflected, that if he pushed on the
present affair to a successful issue, he should be much more likely,
than by prematurely ending it, to gain his objects. He therefore resumed
his survey of the scene around him; and which presented appearances
highly satisfactory, judging from the expression which now and then
animated his countenance. At length he wandered round to the other end
of the church, where a crumbling wall, half covered with ivy, indicated
that there had formerly stood some building apparently of earlier date
than the church. Such was the fact. Gammon soon found himself standing
in a sort of enclosure, which had once been the site of an old chapel.
And here he had not been long making his observations, before he
achieved a discovery of so extraordinary a nature; one so unlikely,
under the circumstances, to have happened; one so calculated to baffle
ordinary calculations concerning the course of events, that the reader
may well disbelieve what I am going to tell him, and treat it as
absurdly improbable. In short, not to keep him in suspense, Gammon
positively discovered evidence of the death of Harry Dreddlington in his
father's lifetime; by means of just such a looking tombstone as he had
long imaged to himself; and as he had resolved that old Quirk should
have got prepared, before the cause came into court. He almost stumbled
over it. 'Twas an old slanting stone, scarcely a foot above the ground,
partly covered with moss, and partly hid by rubbish and long damp grass.
The moon shone brightly enough to enable Gammon, kneeling down, to
decipher, beyond all doubt, what was requisite to establish that part of
the case which had been wanting. For a moment or two he was disposed to
imagine that he was dreaming. When, at length, he took out pencil and
paper, his hands trembled so much that he felt some difficulty in making
an exact copy of the inestimable inscription. Having done this, he drew
a long breath as he replaced the pencil and paper in his pocket-book,
and almost fancied he heard a whispering sound in the air--"Verdict for
the plaintiff." Quitting the churchyard, he walked back to Grilston at a
much quicker rate than that at which he had come, his discovery having
wonderfully elated him, and pushed all other thoughts entirely out of
his mind. But, thought he, doubtless the other side are aware of the
existence of this tombstone--they can hardly be supposed ignorant of it;
they must have looked up their evidence as well as we--and their
attention has been challenged to the existence or non-existence of proof
of the time of the death of Harry Dreddlington:--well--if they are aware
of it, they know that it cuts the ground from under them, and turns
their conveyance, on which, doubtless, they are relying, into waste
paper; if they are _not_, and are under the impression that that deed is
valid and effectual, our proof will fall on them like a thunderbolt.
"Gad,"--he held his breath, and stopped in the middle of the road--"how
immensely important is this little piece of evidence! Why, if they knew
of it--why in Heaven's name is it there still? What easier than to have
got rid of it?--why, they may still: what can that stupid fellow
Parkinson have been about? Yet, is it because it has become
unimportant, on account of their being in possession of other evidence?
What _can_ they have to set against so plain a case as ours is, with
this evidence? Gad, I'll not lose one day's time; but I'll have half a
dozen competent witnesses to inspect, and speak to that same tombstone
in court." Such were some of the thoughts which passed through his mind
as he hastened homeward; and on his arrival, late as it was--only the
yawning hostler having sat up to let him in--he wrote off a letter to
Mr. Quirk, and made it into a parcel to go by the mail in the morning,
acquainting him with the amazing discovery which he had just made, and
urging Mr. Quirk to set about getting up the briefs, for the trial,
without delay; he himself--Gammon--purposing to stop at Grilston a day
or two longer, to complete one or two other arrangements of an important
nature. As soon as Mr. Quirk had read this letter, he devoutly thanked
God for his goodness; and, hurrying to his strong-box, unlocked it, took
out a small sealed packet, and committed it to the flames.

Mr. Aubrey, as soon as he had recovered from the first shock occasioned
by Mr. Parkinson's communication of the proceedings against him, set
about acquainting himself, as minutely as he could, with the true state
of the case. He had requested that gentleman to obtain from one of the
counsel in London, Mr. Crystal, a full account of the case for his--Mr.
Aubrey's--own guidance; and on obtaining a remarkably clear and luminous
statement, and also consulting the various authorities cited in it--such
at least as could be supplied to him by Mr. Parkinson--the vigorous
practical understanding of Mr. Aubrey, aided by his patient application,
soon mastered the whole case, and enabled him to appreciate his perilous
position. Since he could derive no title through the conveyance of Harry
Dreddlington (which had been got in by Geoffrey Dreddlington,) owing to
the death of the former in his father's lifetime,[29] as he (Mr.
Aubrey) understood from his advisers could be easily proved by the
present claimant of the property; the right of accession of Geoffrey
Dreddlington's descendants depended entirely upon the fact whether or
not Stephen Dreddlington had really died without issue; and as to that,
certain anxious and extensive inquiries instituted by Messrs. Runnington
and Mr. Parkinson, in pursuance of the suggestions of their able and
experienced counsel, had led them to entertain serious doubts concerning
the right of Geoffrey's descendants to have entered into possession. By
what means his opponents had obtained their clew to the state of his
title, neither Mr. Aubrey nor any of his advisers could frame a
plausible conjecture. It was certainly possible that Stephen
Dreddlington, who was known to have been a man, like his uncle Harry, of
wild and eccentric habits, and to have been supposed to leave no issue,
might have married privately some woman of inferior station, and left
issue by her, who, living in obscurity, and at a distance from the seat
of the family property, could have no opportunity of inquiring into or
ascertaining their position with reference to the estates, till some
acute and enterprising attorneys, like Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap,
happening to get hold of them, and family papers in their possession,
had taken up their case. When, with impressions such as these, Mr.
Aubrey perused and re-perused the opinions of the conveyancer given on
the occasion of his (Mr. Aubrey's) marriage, he was confounded at the
supineness and indifference which he had even twice exhibited, and felt
disposed now greatly to overvalue the importance of every adverse
circumstance. The boldness, again, and systematic energy with which the
case of the claimant was prosecuted, and the eminent legal opinions
which were alleged, and with every appearance of truth, to concur in his
favor, afforded additional grounds for rational apprehension. He looked
the danger, however, full in the face, and as far as lay in his power,
as a conscientious man, prepared for the evil day which might so soon
come upon him. Certain extensive and somewhat costly alterations which
he had been on the point of commencing at Yatton, he abandoned. But for
the earnest interference of friends, he would at once have given up his
establishment in Grosvenor Street, and applied for the Chiltern
Hundreds, in order to retire from political life. Considering the
possibility of his soon being declared the wrongful holder of the
property, he contracted his expenditure as far as he could, without
challenging unnecessary public attention; and paid into his banker's
hands all his Christmas rents, sacredly resolving to abstain from
drawing out one farthing of what might soon be proved to belong to
another. At every point occurred the dreadful question--if I am declared
never to have been the rightful owner of the property, how am I to
discharge my frightful liabilities to him who is? Mr. Aubrey had nothing
except the Yatton property. He had but an insignificant sum in the
funds; Mrs. Aubrey's settlement was out of lands at Yatton, as also was
the little income bequeathed to Kate by her father. Could anything be
conceived more dreadful, under these circumstances, than the mere
danger--the slightest probability--of their being deprived of
Yatton?--and with a debt of at the very least SIXTY THOUSAND POUNDS, due
to him who had been wrongfully kept out of his property? That was the
millstone which seemed to drag them all to the bottom. Against _that_,
what could the kindness of the most generous friends, what could his own
most desperate exertions, avail? All this had poor Aubrey constantly
before his eyes, together with--his wife, his children, his sister. What
was to become of _them_? It was long before the real nature and extent
of his danger became known among his friends and neighbors. When,
however, they were made aware of it, an extraordinary interest and
sympathy were excited throughout almost the whole county. Whenever his
attorney, Mr. Parkinson, appeared in public, he was besieged by most
anxious inquiries concerning his distinguished client, whose manly
modesty and fortitude, under the pressure of his sudden and almost
unprecedented difficulty and peril, endeared him more than ever to all
who had an opportunity of appreciating his position. With what intense
and absorbing interest were the ensuing assizes looked for!---- At
length they arrived.

The ancient city of York exhibited, on the commission day of the spring
assizes for the year 18--, the usual scene of animation and excitement.
The High Sheriff, attended by an imposing retinue, went out to meet the
judges, and escorted them, amid the shrill clangor of trumpets, to the
Castle, where the commission was opened with the usual formalities. The
judges were Lord Widdrington, the Lord Chief-Justice of the King's
Bench, and Mr. Justice Grayley, a puisne judge of the same court--both
admirable lawyers. The former was possessed of the more powerful
intellect. He was what may be called a great scientific lawyer,
referring everything to _principle_, as extracted from precedent. Mr.
Justice Grayley was almost unrivalled in his knowledge of the _details_
of the law; his governing maxim being _ita lex scripta_. Here his
knowledge was equally minute and accurate, and most readily applied to
every case brought before him. Never sat there upon the bench a more
painstaking judge--one more anxious to do right equally in great things
as in small. Both were men of rigid integrity: 'tis a glorious thing to
be able to challenge the inquiry--when, for centuries, have other than
men of rigid integrity sat upon the English Bench? Lord Widdrington,
however, in temper was stern, arbitrary, and overbearing, and his
manners were disfigured not a little by coarseness; while his companion
was a man of exemplary amiability, affability, and forbearance. Lord
Widdrington presided at the Civil Court, (in which, of course, would
come on the important cause in which we are interested,) and Mr. Justice
Grayley in the Criminal Court.

Soon after the sitting of the court, on the ensuing morning--"Will your
Lordship allow me," rose and inquired the sleek, smiling, and portly Mr.
Subtle, dead silence prevailing as soon as he had mentioned the name of
the cause about which he was inquiring, "to mention a cause of _Doe on
the demise of Titmouse v. Jolter_--a special jury cause, in which there
are a great many witnesses to be examined on both sides--and to ask that
a day may be fixed for it to come on?"

"Whom do you appear for, Mr. Subtle?" inquired his Lordship.

"For the plaintiff, my Lord."

"And who appears for the defendant?"

"The Attorney-General leads for the defendant, my Lord," replied Mr.
Sterling, who, with Mr. Crystal, was also retained for the defendant.

"Well, perhaps you can agree between yourselves upon a day, and in the
mean time similar arrangements may be made for any other special jury
causes that may require it." After due consultation, Monday week was
agreed upon by the parties, and fixed by his Lordship, for the trial of
the cause.--During the Sunday preceding it, York was crowded with
persons of the highest distinction from all parts of the county, who
felt interested in the result of the great cause of the assizes. About
mid-day a dusty travelling carriage and four dashed into the streets
from the London road, and drove up to the principal inn; it contained
the Attorney-General (who just finished reading his brief as he entered
York) and his clerk. The Attorney-General was a man of striking and
highly intellectual countenance; but he looked, on alighting, somewhat
fatigued with his long journey. He was a man of extraordinary natural
talents, and also a first-rate lawyer--one whose right to take the
woolsack, whenever it should become vacant, was recognized by all the
profession. His professional celebrity, and his coming down "_special_"
on the present occasion, added to the circumstance of his being well
known to be a personal friend of his client, Mr. Aubrey--whence it might
be inferred that his great powers would be exerted to their utmost--was
well calculated to enhance the interest, if that were possible, of the
occasion which had brought him down at so great an expense, and to
sustain so heavy a responsibility as the conduct of a cause of such
magnitude as this.

He came to lead against a formidable opponent. Mr. Subtle was the leader
of the Northern circuit, a man of matchless tact and practical sagacity,
and consummately skilful in the conduct of a cause. The only thing _he_
ever looked at, was THE VERDICT; to the gaining of which he directed all
his energies, and sacrificed every other consideration. As for display,
he despised it. A _speech_, as such, was his aversion. He entered into a
friendly, but exquisitely crafty _conversation_ with the jury; for he
was so quick at perceiving the effect of his address on the mind of each
of the twelve, and dexterous in accommodating himself to what he had
detected to be the passing mood of each, that they individually felt as
if they were all the while reasoning with, and being convinced by him.
His placid, smiling, handsome countenance, his gentlemanly bearing and
insinuating address, full of good-natured cheerful confidence in his
cause, were irresistible. He flattered, he soothed, he fascinated the
jury, producing an impression upon their minds which they often felt
indignant at his opponent's attempting to efface. In fact, as a _nisi
prius_ leader he was unrivalled, as well in stating as in arguing a
case, as well in examining as cross-examining a witness. It required no
little practical experience to form an adequate estimate of Mr. Subtle's
skill in the management of a cause; for he did everything with such a
smiling, careless, unconcerned air, equally in the great pinch and
strain of a case, as in the pettiest details, that you would be apt to
suspect that none but the easiest and most straightforward cases fell to
his lot!

Titmouse, Titmouse, methinks the fates favored you in assigning to you
Mr. Subtle!

Next came Mr. QUICKSILVER, who had received what may be called a
_muffling_ retainer. What a contrast was he to Mr. Subtle! Reckless,
rhetorical, eloquent, ready, witty--possessing a vast extent of general
knowledge, but rather slenderly furnished with law--he presented to the
jury, _himself_--not his client, or his client's case; infinitely more
anxious to make a splendid figure in public, than to secure, by watchful
activity, the interests of his clients. Why, then, was such a man
retained in the cause? 'Twas a fancy of Quirk's, a vast political
admirer of Quicksilver's, who had made one or two most splendid speeches
for him in libel cases brought against the _Sunday Flash_. Gammon most
earnestly expostulated, but Quirk was inexorable; and himself carried
his retainer to Mr. Quicksilver. Gammon, however, was somewhat consoled
by the reflection, that this wild elephant would be, in a manner, held
in check by Mr. Subtle and Mr. Lynx, who, he hoped, would prevent any
serious mischief from happening. Lynx possessed the qualities which his
name would suggest to you. I have partly described him already. He was a
man of minute accuracy; and "got up" every case in which he was engaged
as if his life had depended on the result. Nothing escaped him. He kept
his mind constantly even with the current of the cause. He was a man to
_steer_ a leader, if ever that leader should get, for an instant, on the
wrong tack, or be uncertain as to his course. His suggestion and
interference--rare, indeed, with such a man as Mr. Subtle, incessant
with Mr. Quicksilver--were always worth attending to, and consequently
received with deference.

For Mr. Aubrey also was retained a formidable "BAR." Mr.
Attorney-General was a man much superior, in point of intellect and
legal knowledge, to Mr. Subtle. His mind was distinguished by its
tranquil power. He had a rare and invaluable faculty of arraying before
his mind's eye all the facts and bearings of the most intricate case,
and contemplating them, as it were, not successively, but
simultaneously. His perception was quick as light; and, at the same
time--rare, most rare accompaniment!--his judgment sound, his memory
signally retentive. Inferior, possibly, to Mr. Subtle in rapid and
delicate appreciation of momentary advantages, he was sagacious, where
Mr. Subtle was only ingenious. Mr. Attorney-General had as much weight
with the judge as Mr. Subtle with the jury. With the former there was a
candor and straightforwardness--a dignified simplicity--which insensibly
won the confidence of the judge; who, on the other hand, felt himself
obliged to be ever on his guard against the slippery sophistries of Mr.
Subtle, whom he thus got to regard with constant suspicion.

Mr. STERLING, the second counsel for the defendant, was a king's
counsel, and a rival of Mr. Subtle upon the circuit. He was a man of
great power; and, on important occasions, no man at the bar could acquit
himself with more distinction. As a speaker, he was eloquent and
impressive, perhaps deficient in vivacity; but he was a man of clear
and powerful intellect; prompt in seizing the bearings of a case; a
capital lawyer; and possessing, even on the most trying occasions,
imperturbable self-possession.

Mr. CRYSTAL, with some faults of manner and bearing, was an honorable
high-minded man; clear-sighted and strong-headed; an accurate and ready
lawyer; vigilant and acute.

See, then, the combatants in this memorable encounter; for
_Titmouse_--Mr. SUBTLE, Mr. QUICKSILVER, Mr. LYNX; for _Mr. Aubrey_--Mr.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL, Mr. STERLING, Mr. CRYSTAL.

The consultation of each party was long and anxious.

About eight o'clock on the Sunday evening, at Mr. Subtle's lodgings,
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, accompanied by Mr. Mortmain, whom they
had brought down to watch the case, made their appearance shortly after
Mr. Quicksilver and Mr. Lynx.

"Our case seems complete, _now_" said Mr. Subtle, casting a penetrating
and most significant glance at Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, and then at his
juniors, to whom, before the arrival of their clients and Mr. Mortmain,
he had been mentioning the essential link which, a month before, he had
pointed out as missing, and the marvellous good fortune by which they
had been able to supply it at the eleventh hour.

"That tombstone's a godsend, Subtle, isn't it?" said Quicksilver, with a
grim smile. Lynx neither smiled nor spoke. He was a very matter-of-fact
person. So as the case came out clear and nice in court, he cared about
nothing more; at that moment he felt that he should be _functus
officio_!--But whatever might be the insinuation or suspicion implied in
the observation of Mr. Subtle, the reader must, by this time, be well
aware how little it was warranted by the facts.[30]

"I shall open it very quietly," said Mr. Subtle, putting into his pocket
his penknife, with which he had been paring his nails, while Mr.
Quicksilver had been talking very fast. "What do you think, Mr. Lynx?
Had I better allude boldly to the conveyance executed by Harry
Dreddlington, and which becomes useless as soon as we prove his death in
his father's lifetime?"

"Ah! there's that blessed tombstone again," interposed Quicksilver, with
a sarcastic smile.

--"Or," resumed Mr. Subtle, "content myself with barely making out our
pedigree, and let the conveyance of Harry Dreddlington come from the
other side?"

"I think, perhaps, that the latter would be the quieter and safer
course," replied Lynx.

"By the way, gentlemen," said Mr. Subtle, suddenly, addressing Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, "how do we come to know anything about the
mortgage executed by Harry Dreddlington?"

"Oh! _that_ you know," replied Quirk, quickly, "we first got scent of in
Mr."---- Here he paused suddenly, and turned quite red.

"It was suggested," said Gammon, calmly, "by one of the gentlemen whose
opinions we have taken in the case--I forget by whom--that, from some
recital, it was probable that there existed such an instrument; and that
put us on making inquiry."

"Nothing more likely," added Mortmain, "than that it, or an abstract, or
minute of it, should get into Stephen Dreddlington's hands!"

"Ah! well! well!" said Mr. Subtle, shrugging his shoulders,--"I must say
there's rather an air of mystery about the case. But--about that
tombstone--what sort of witnesses will speak"----

"Will the evidence be requisite," inquired Lynx, "in the plaintiff's
case? All _we_ shall have to do will be to prove the fact that Harry
died without issue, of which there's satisfactory evidence; and as to
the _time_ of his death, that will become material only if _they_ put in
the conveyance of Harry."

"True--true; ah! I'll turn that over in my mind. Rely upon it, I'll give
Mr. Attorney-General as little to lay hold of as possible. Thank you,
Lynx, for the hint. Now, gentlemen," said he, turning to Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, "one other question--What _kind of looking_ people are
the witnesses who prove the later steps of the pedigree of Mr. Titmouse?
Respectable? eh?--You know a good deal will depend on the credit which
they may obtain with the jury!"

"They're very decent creditable persons, you will find, sir," said
Gammon.

"Good, good. Who struck the special jury?"

"We did, sir."

"Well, I must say that was a _very_ prudent step for _you_ to take!
considering the rank in life and circumstances of the respective
parties! However, to be sure, if _you_ didn't, they would--so--well;
good-night, gentlemen, good-night." So the consultation broke up; and
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap returned home to their inn in a very
serious and anxious mood.

"You're a marvellous prudent person, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, in a
somewhat fierce whisper, as they walked along, "I suppose you would have
gone on to explain the little matter of Steggars, and so have had our
briefs thrown at our heads"----

"Well, well," grunted Quirk, "that _was_ a slip!" Here they reached
their inn. Titmouse was staying there; and in Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap's absence, he had got very drunk, and was quarrelling under the
archway with "Boots;" so they ordered him to bed, they themselves
sitting up till a very late hour in the morning.

The consultation at the Attorney-General's had taken place about three
o'clock in the afternoon, within an hour after his arrival; and had been
attended by Messrs. Sterling, Crystal, and Mansfield--by Mr. Runnington,
and Mr. Parkinson, and by Mr. Aubrey, whom the Attorney-General received
with the most earnest expressions of sympathy and friendship; listening
to every question and every observation of his with the utmost
deference.

"It would be both idle and unkind to disguise from you, Aubrey," said
he, "that our position is somewhat precarious. It depends entirely on
the chance we may have of breaking down the plaintiff's case; for we
have but a slender one of our own. I suppose they can bring proof of the
death of Harry Dreddlington in his father's lifetime?"

"Oh yes, sir!" answered Mr. Parkinson, "there is an old tombstone behind
Yatton church which establishes that fact beyond all doubt: and a week
or two ago no fewer than five or six persons have been carefully
inspecting it; doubtless they will be called as witnesses to-morrow."

"I feared as much. Then are ours no more than watching briefs. Depend
upon it, they would not have carried on the affair with so high a hand
if they had not pretty firm ground under foot! Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap are tolerably well known in town--not _over_-scrupulous, eh,
Mr. Runnington?"

"Indeed, Mr. Attorney, you are right. I don't doubt they are prepared to
go all lengths."

"Well, we'll sift their evidence pretty closely, at any rate. So you
really have reason to fear, as you intimated when you entered the room,
that they have valid evidence of Stephen Dreddlington having left
issue?"

"Mr. Snap told me," said Mr. Parkinson, "this morning, that they would
prove issue of Stephen Dreddlington, and issue of that issue, as clean
as a whistle--that was his phrase."

"Ay, ay--but we mustn't take all for gospel that _he_ would say,"
replied the Attorney-General, smiling sarcastically.

"They've got two houses filled with witnesses, I understand," said Mr.
Runnington.

"Do they seem Yorkshire people, or strangers?"

"Why, most of them that I have seen," replied Parkinson, "seem
strangers."

"Ah, they will prove, I suppose," said the Attorney-General, "the later
steps of the pedigree, when Stephen Dreddlington married at a distance
from his native county."

They then entered into a very full and minute examination of the case;
after which,--"Well," said the Attorney-General, evidently fatigued with
his long journey, and rising from his chair, "we must trust to what will
turn up in the chapter of accidents to-morrow. I shall be expected to
dine with the bar to-day," he added; "but immediately after dinner--say
at half-past seven o'clock, I shall be here and at your service, if
anything should be required." Then the consultation broke up. Mr. Aubrey
had, at their earnest entreaty, brought Mrs. Aubrey and Kate from
Yatton, on Saturday; for they declared themselves unable to bear the
dreadful suspense in which they should be left at Yatton. Yielding,
therefore, to these their very reasonable wishes, he had engaged private
lodgings at the outskirts of the town. On quitting the consultation,
which, without at the same time affecting over-strictness, he had
regretted being fixed for Sunday--but the necessity of the case appeared
to warrant it--he repaired to the magnificent MINSTER, where the evening
prayers were being read, and where were Mrs. Aubrey and Kate. The
prayers were being chanted as he entered; and he was conducted to a
stall nearly opposite to where those whom he loved so fondly were
standing. The psalms allotted for the evening were those in which the
royal sufferer, David, was pouring forth the deepest sorrows of his
heart; and their appropriateness to Mr. Aubrey's state of mind, added to
the effect produced by the melting melody in which they were conveyed to
his ears, excited in him, and, he perceived, also in those opposite, the
deepest emotion. The glorious pile was beginning to grow dusky with the
stealing shadows of evening; and the solemn and sublime strains of the
organ, during the playing of the anthem, filled those present, who had
any pretensions to sensibility, with mingled feelings of tenderness and
awe. Those in whom we are so deeply interested, felt at once subdued and
elevated; and as they quitted the darkening fabric, through which the
pealing tones of the organ were yet reverberating, they could not help
inquiring, should they ever enter it again,--and in what altered
circumstances might it be?

To return, however--though it is, indeed, like descending from the holy
mountain into the bustle and hubbub of the city at its foot--Mr.
Parkinson, being most unexpectedly, and as he felt it unfortunately,
summoned to Grilston that afternoon, in order to send up some deeds of a
distinguished client to London, for the purpose of immediately effecting
a mortgage, set off in a post-chaise, at top-speed, in a very unenviable
frame of mind; and by seven o'clock was seated in his office at
Grilston, busily turning over a great number of deeds and papers, in a
large tin case, with the words "Right Honorable the Earl of Yelverton"
painted on the outside. Having turned over almost everything inside, and
found all that he wanted, he was going to toss back again all the deeds
which were not requisite for his immediate purpose, when he happened to
see one lying at the very bottom which he had not before observed. It
was not a large, but an old deed--and he took it up and hastily examined
it.

We have seen a piece of unexpected good-fortune on the part of Gammon
and his client; and the reader will not be disappointed at finding
something of a similar kind befalling Mr. Aubrey, even at the eleventh
hour. Mr. Parkinson's journey, which he had execrated a hundred times
over as he came down, produced a discovery which made him tremble all
over with agitation and delighted excitement, and begin to look upon it
as almost owing to an interference of Providence. The deed which he
looked at, bore an indorsement of the name of "_Dreddlington_." After a
hasty glance over its contents, he tried to recollect by what accident a
document, belonging to Mr. Aubrey, could have found its way into the box
containing Lord Yelverton's deeds; and it at length occurred to him
that, some time before, Mr. Aubrey had proposed advancing several
thousand pounds to Lord Yelverton, on mortgage of a small portion of his
Lordship's property--but which negotiation had afterwards been broken
off; that Mr. Aubrey's title-deeds happened to be at the same time open
and loose in his office--and he recollected having considerable trouble
in separating the respective documents which had got mixed together.
This one, after all, had been by some accident overlooked, till it
turned up in this most timely and extraordinary manner! Having hastily
effected the object which had brought him back to Grilston, he ordered a
post-chaise and four, and within a quarter of an hour was thundering
back, at top-speed, on his way to York, which, the horses reeking and
foaming, he reached a little after ten o'clock. He jumped out, with the
precious deed in his pocket, the instant that his chaise-door was
opened, and ran off, without saying more than--"I'm gone to the
Attorney-General's." This was heard by many passers-by and persons
standing round; and it spread far and wide that something of the utmost
importance had transpired, with reference to the great ejectment cause
of Mr. Aubrey. Soon afterwards, messengers and clerks, belonging to Mr.
Runnington and Mr. Parkinson, were to be seen running to and fro,
summoning Mr. Sterling, Mr. Crystal, Mr. Mansfield, and also Mr. Aubrey,
to a second consultation at the Attorney-General's. About eleven o'clock
they were all assembled. The deed which had occasioned all this
excitement, was one calculated indeed to produce that effect; and it
filled the minds of all present with astonishment and delight. It was,
in a word, a DEED OF CONFIRMATION by OLD DREDDLINGTON, the father of
Harry Dreddlington, of the conveyance by the latter to Geoffrey
Dreddlington, who, in the manner already mentioned to the reader, had
got an assignment of that conveyance to himself. After the
Attorney-General had satisfied himself as to the account to be given of
the deed--the custody whence it came, namely, the attorney for the
defendant; Mr. Parkinson undertaking to swear, without any hesitation,
that whatever deeds of Mr. Aubrey's he possessed, he had taken from the
muniment room at Yatton--the second consultation broke up. Mr. Aubrey,
on hearing the nature and effect of the instrument explained by the
Attorney-General and Mr. Mansfield--all his counsel, in short,
concurring in opinion as to the triumphant effect which this instrument
would produce on the morrow--may be pardoned for regarding it, in the
excitement of the moment, as almost a direct interference of Providence.

A few minutes before nine o'clock on the ensuing morning, the occasional
shrill blasts of the trumpets announced that the judges were on their
way to the Castle, the approaches to which were crowded with carriages
and pedestrians of a highly respectable appearance. As the Castle clock
finished striking nine, Lord Widdrington, in a short wig and plain
black silk gown,[31] took his seat, and the swearing of the special jury
commenced. The court was crowded almost to suffocation; all the chief
places being filled with persons of distinction in the county. The
benches on each side of the judge were occupied by ladies,
who--especially the Countess of Oldacre and Lady De la Zouch--evinced a
painful degree of anxiety and excitement in their countenances and
demeanor. The bar also mustered in great force; the crown court being
quite deserted, although "a great murder case" was going on there. The
civil court was on the present occasion the point of attraction, not
only on account of the interesting nature of the case to be tried, but
of the keen contest expected between the Attorney-General and Mr.
Subtle. The former, as he entered--his commanding features gazed at by
many an anxious eye with hope, and a feeling that on his skill and
learning depended that day the destination of the Yatton property--bowed
to the judge, and then nodded and shook hands with several of the
counsel nearest to him; then he sat down, and his clerk having opened
his bags, and taken out his huge brief, he began turning over its leaves
with a calm and attentive air, occasionally conversing with his juniors.
Every one present observed that the defendant's counsel and attorneys
wore the confident looks of winning men; while their opponents,
quick-sighted enough, also observed the circumstance, and looked, on
that account alone, a shade more anxious than when they had entered the
court. Mr. Subtle requested Gammon, whose ability he had soon detected,
to sit immediately beneath him; next to Gammon sat Quirk; then Snap; and
beside him Mr. Titmouse, with a staring sky-blue flowered silk
handkerchief round his neck, a gaudy waistcoat, a tight surtout, and
white kid gloves. He looked exceedingly pale, and dared hardly
interchange a word with even Snap, who was just as irritable and
excited as his senior partners. It was quickly known all over the court
which was Titmouse! Mr. Aubrey scarcely showed himself in court all day,
though he stood at the door near the bench, and could hear all that
passed; Lord De la Zouch and one or two other personal friends standing
with him, engaged, from time to time, in anxious conversation.

The jury having been sworn, Mr. Lynx rose, and in a few hurried
sentences, to the lay audience utterly unintelligible, intimated the
nature of the pleadings in the cause. The Attorney-General then in a low
tone requested that all the witnesses might leave the court.[32] As soon
as the little disturbance occasioned by this move had ceased, Mr. Subtle
rose, and in a low but distinct tone said, "May it please your
Lordship--Gentlemen of the Jury,--In this cause I have the honor to
appear before you as counsel for the plaintiff; and it now becomes my
duty to state as briefly as I can, the nature of his case. It is
impossible, gentlemen, that we should not be aware of the unusual
interest excited by this cause; and which may be accounted for by the
very large estates in this county which are sought this day to be
transferred to a comparative stranger, from the family who have long
enjoyed them, and of whom I am anxious to say everything respectful; for
you will very soon find that the name on the record is that of only the
nominal defendant; and although all that is _professed_ to be this day
sought to be recovered is a very trifling portion of the property, your
verdict will undoubtedly in effect decide the question as to the true
ownership and enjoyment of the large estates now held by the gentleman
who is the substantial defendant--I mean Mr. Aubrey, the member of
Parliament for the borough of Yatton; for whatever answer he might make
to an action brought to recover his whole estate, he must make upon the
present occasion." Aware of the watchful and formidable opponent who
would in due time answer him, and also of being himself entitled to the
general reply--to the last word--Mr. Subtle proceeded to state the
nature of the plaintiff's case with the utmost brevity and clearness.
Scarcely any sound was heard but that of the pens of the short-hand
writers, and of the counsel taking their notes. Mr. Subtle, having
handed up two or three copies of the pedigree which he held in his hand
to the judge, the jury, and his opponents, pointed out with distinctness
and precision every link in the chain of evidence which he intended to
lay before the jury; and having done this--having presented as few
salient points of attack to his opponent as he possibly could--he sat
down, professing his entire ignorance of what case could be set up in
answer to that which he had opened. He had not been on his legs quite
half an hour; and when he ceased--how he had disappointed every one
present, except the judge and the bar! Instead of a speech apparently
befitting so great an occasion--impressive and eloquent--here had been a
brief dry statement of a few uninteresting facts--of dates, of births,
deaths, marriages, registers, entries, inscriptions, deeds,
wills--without a single touch of feeling, or ray of eloquence. The
momentary feeling of disappointment in the audience, however--almost all
of whom, it may easily be believed, were in the interest of the
Aubreys--quickly yielded to one of satisfaction and relief; as they
thought they might regard so meagre a speech as heralding as meagre a
case. As soon as he had sat down, Mr. Quicksilver rose and called the
first witness. "We're safe!" said the Attorney-General to Mr. Sterling
and Mr. Crystal, with his hand before his mouth, and with the very
faintest whisper that could be audible to those whom he addressed; and
the witness having been sworn, they all resumed their seats and their
writing. The first and the subsequent witness established one or two
preliminary and formal points--the Attorney-General scarcely rising to
put a question to them. The third witness was examined by Mr. Subtle
with apparent unconcern, but really with exquisite anxiety. From the
earnestness and attention with which the words of the witness were
watched and taken down by both the judge and the counsel, who knew
somewhat better than the audience where the strain of the case
commenced, it must have appeared to the latter, that either Mr. Subtle
under-estimated, or his opponents over-estimated, the value of the
evidence now in process of being extracted by Mr. Subtle, in short,
easy, pointed questions, and with a bland and smiling countenance.

"Not so fast, sir," gruffly interposed Lord Widdrington, addressing the
witness.

"Take time, Mr. Jones," said Mr. Subtle, kindly, fearful of ruffling or
discomposing an important witness. The Attorney-General rose to
cross-examine; pressed him quietly but closely; varied the shape of his
questions; now he soothed, then he startled by his sternness; but sat
down, evidently having produced no impression. Thus it was with one or
two succeeding witnesses; the Attorney-General, on each occasion,
resuming his seat after his abortive efforts with perfect composure. At
length, however, by a very admirable and well-sustained fire of
cross-questioning, he completely demolished a material witness; and the
hopes of all interested in behalf of his clients rose high. Mr. Subtle,
who had been all the while paring his nails, and from time to time
smiling with a careless air, (though you might as safely have touched a
tigress suckling her cubs as attempted at that moment to disturb him, so
absorbed was he in intense anxiety,) believing that he could establish
the same facts by another and, as he thought, a better witness, did not
re-examine; but calling that other, with an air of nonchalance,
succeeded in extracting from him all that the former had failed in;
baffling all the attempts of the Attorney-General to affect his credit.
At length, another witness being in the box,--

"I object, my Lord, to that question," said Mr. Attorney-General, as Mr.
Subtle, amid many indifferent and apparently irrelevant questions,
quietly slipped in one of the greatest possible importance and advantage
to him--had it been answered as he desired. 'T was quite delightful to
see the Attorney-General and his experienced and watchful juniors all
rise at one and the same instant: showing how vain were the tricks and
ingenuity of their sly opponent. Mr. Attorney-General stated his
objection briefly and pointedly; Mr. Subtle answered him, followed by
Quicksilver and Lynx; and then Mr. Attorney-General replied, with great
force and clearness. This keen encounter of their wits over--

"I shall allow the question to be put," said Lord Widdrington, after a
pause--"But I have great doubts as to its propriety. I will therefore
take a note of Mr. Attorney-General's objection." Four or five similar
conflicts arose during the course of the plaintiff's case:--now
concerning the competency of a witness--then as to the admissibility of
a document, or the propriety of a particular question. On each of these
occasions there were displayed on both sides consummate logical skill
and acuteness, especially by the two leaders. Distinctions, the most
delicate and subtle, were suggested with suddenness, and as promptly
encountered; the most artful manœuvres to secure dangerous admissions
resorted to, and baffled; the most recondite principles of evidence
brought to bear with admirable readiness on both sides. To deal with
them, required, indeed, the practised, penetrating, and powerful
intellect of Lord Widdrington. Some points he disposed of promptly to
the satisfaction of both parties; on others he hesitated, and at length
reserved them. Though none but the more experienced and able members of
the bar could in the least degree enter into and appreciate the nature
of these conflicts, they were watched with untiring attention and
eagerness by all present, both ladies and gentlemen--by the lowly and
the distinguished. And though the intensity of the feelings of all was
manifest by a mere glimpse round the court, yet any momentary display of
eccentricity on the part of a witness, or of petulance or repartee on
the part of counsel, would occasion a momentary merriment which, in
point of fact, served only as a sort of _relief_ to the strained
feelings of the audience, and instantly disappeared. The tombstone part
of the case was got through easily; scarcely any attempt being made on
the part of Mr. Aubrey's counsel to resist or interfere with it. But the
great--the hottest part of the fight--occurred at that point of the
case, where Titmouse's descent from Stephen Dreddlington was sought to
be established. This gentleman, who had been a very wild person, whose
movements were very difficult to be traced or accounted for, had entered
the navy, and ultimately died at sea, as had always been imagined,
single and childless. It was proved, however, that so far from such
being the case, he had married a person at Portsmouth, of inferior
station, and that by her he had a daughter, only two years before his
death. Both mother and daughter, after undergoing great privation, and
no notice being taken of the mother by any of her late husband's family,
removed to the house of a humble and distant relative in Cumberland,
where the mother afterwards died, leaving her daughter only fifteen
years old. When she grew up, she lived in some menial capacity in
Cumberland, and ultimately married one Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse; who,
after living for some years a cordwainer at Whitehaven, found his way to
Grilston, in Yorkshire, in the neighborhood of which town he had lived
for some years in very humble circumstances. There he had married; and
about two years afterwards his wife died, leaving a son--our friend
Tittlebat Titmouse. Both of them afterwards came to London: where, in
four or five years' time, the father died, leaving the little Titmouse
to flutter and hop about in the wide world as best he could. During the
whole of this part of the case, Mr. Gammon had evinced deep anxiety; and
at a particular point--perhaps the crisis--his agitation was excessive;
yet it was almost entirely concealed by his remarkable self-control. The
little documentary evidence of which Gammon, at his first interview with
Titmouse, found him possessed, proved at the trial, as Gammon had
foreseen, of great importance. The evidence in support of this part of
the case, and which it took till two o'clock on the ensuing afternoon to
get through, was subjected to a most determined and skilful opposition
by the Attorney-General, but in vain. The case had been got up with the
utmost care, under the excellent management of Lynx; and Mr. Subtle's
consummate tact and ability brought it, at length, fully and distinctly
out before the jury.

"That, my Lord," said he, as he sat down after re-examining his last
witness, "is the case on the part of the plaintiff." On this the judge
and jury withdrew, for a short time, to obtain refreshment. During their
absence, the Attorney-General, Mr. Sterling, Mr. Crystal, and Mr.
Mansfield, might have been seen, with their heads all laid close
together, engaged in anxious consultation--a group gazed at by the eager
eyes of many a spectator, whose beating heart wished their cause
godspeed. The Attorney-General then withdrew for a few moments, also to
seek refreshment; and returning at the same time with the judge, after a
moment's pause rose, bowed to the judge, then to the jury, and opened
the defendant's case. His manner was calm and impressive; his person was
dignified; and his clear, distinct voice fell on the listening ear like
the sound of silver. After a graceful allusion to the distinguished
character of his friend and client, Mr. Aubrey, (to whose eminent
position in the House of Commons he bore his personal testimony,) to the
magnitude of the interests now at stake, and the extraordinary nature of
the claim set up, he proceeded: "On every account, therefore, I feel
sensible, gentlemen, to an unusual and most painful extent, of the very
great responsibility now resting upon my learned friends and myself;
lest any miscarriage of mine should prejudice in any degree the
important interests committed to us, or impair the strength of the case
which I am about to submit to you on the part of Mr. Aubrey; a case
which, I assure you, unless some extraordinary mischance should befall
us, will, I believe, annihilate that which, with so much pains, so much
tact, and so much ability, has just been laid before you by my learned
friend Mr. Subtle; and establish the defendant in the safe possession of
that large property which is the subject of the present most
extraordinary and unexpected litigation. But, gentlemen, before
proceeding so far as that, it is fitting that I should call your
attention to the nature of the case set up on the part of the plaintiff,
and the sort of evidence by which it has been attempted to be supported;
and I am very sanguine of being successful in showing you that the
plaintiff's witnesses are not entitled to the credit to which they lay
claim; and, consequently, that there is no case made out for the
defendant to answer." He then entered into a rigorous analysis of the
plaintiff's evidence, contrasting each conflicting portion with the
other, with singular cogency; and commenting with powerful severity upon
the demeanor and character of many of the witnesses. On proceeding, at
length, to open the case of the defendant--"And here, gentlemen," said
he, "I am reminded of the observation with which my learned friend
concluded--that he was entirely ignorant of the case which we meant to
set up in answer to that which he had opened on the part of the
plaintiff. Gentlemen, it would have been curious, indeed, had it been
otherwise--had my friend's penetrating eye been able to inspect the
contents of my client's strong-box--and so become acquainted with the
evidence on which he rests his title to the property now in dispute. My
learned friend has, however, succeeded in entitling himself to
information on that point; and he shall have it--and to his heart's
content." Here Mr. Subtle cast a glance of smiling incredulity towards
the jury, and defiance towards the Attorney-General. He took his pen
into his hand, however, and his juniors looked very anxious.
"Gentlemen," continued the Attorney-General, "I am ready to concede to
my learned friend every inch of the case which he has been endeavoring
to make out; that he has completely established his pedigree.--At all
events, I am ready to concede this for the purpose of the case which is
now under discussion before you." He then mentioned the conveyance by
Harry Dreddlington of all his interest----"You forget that he died in
his father's lifetime, Mr. Attorney-General," interposed Mr. Subtle,
with a placid smile, and the air of a man who is suddenly relieved from
a vast pressure of anxiety.

"Not a bit of it, gentlemen, not a bit of it--'tis a part of my case. My
learned friend is quite right; Harry Dreddlington _did_ die in his
father's lifetime:--but"---- Here Mr. Subtle gazed at the
Attorney-General with unaffected curiosity; and when the latter came to
mention "the _Deed of Confirmation_ by THE FATHER of Harry
Dreddlington," an acute observer might have observed a slight change of
color in Mr. Subtle. Lynx looked at the Attorney-General as if he
expected every instant to receive a musket-ball in his breast!

"What, '_confirm_' a NULLITY, Mr. Attorney-General?" interrupted Mr.
Subtle, laying down his pen with a smile of derision; but a moment or
two afterwards, "Mr. Mortmain," said he, in a hasty whisper, "what do
you think of this? Tell me--in four words"--Mortmain, his eye glued to
the face of the Attorney-General the while, muttered hastily something
about "_operating as a new grant_--_as a new conveyance_."

"Pshaw! I mean what's the _answer_ to the Attorney-General?" muttered
Mr. Subtle, impatiently; but his countenance preserved its expression of
smiling nonchalance. "You will oblige me, Mr. Mortmain," he by-and-by
whispered in a quiet but peremptory tone, "by giving your utmost
attention to the question as to the effect of this deed--so that I may
shape my objection to it properly when it is tendered in evidence. If it
really have the legal effect attributed to it, and which I suspect it
really to have, we may as well shut up our briefs. I _thought_ there
must be some such cursed point or other in the background!"

Gammon saw the real state of Mr. Subtle's mind, and his cheek turned
pale, but he preserved a smile on his countenance, as he sat with his
arms folded. Quirk eyed him with undisguised agitation, scarce daring to
look up at Mr. Subtle. Titmouse, seeing a little dismay in his camp,
turned very white and cold, and sat still, scarce daring to breathe;
while Snap looked like a terrier consciously going to have its teeth
pulled out!

At length the Attorney-General, after stating that, in addition to the
case which he had intimated, as resting mainly on the deed of
confirmation, he should proceed to prove the pedigree of Mr. Aubrey, sat
down, having spoken about two hours and a half, expressing his
conviction that when the defendant's evidence should have been closed,
the jury, under his Lordship's direction, would return a verdict for the
defendant; and that, too, without leaving the jury-box, where, by their
long and patient attention, they had so honorably acquitted themselves
of the important duty imposed upon them by the constitution.

"James Parkinson!" exclaimed Mr. Sterling, quietly but distinctly, as
the Attorney-General sat down. "You are the attorney for the defendant?"
inquired Mr. Sterling, as soon as the witness had been sworn. "Do you
produce a conveyance between Harry Dreddlington and Moses Aaron?" &c.
(specifying it.) It was proved and put in, without much opposition. So
also was another--the assignment from Moses Aaron to Geoffrey
Dreddlington.

"Do you also produce a deed between Harry Dreddlington the elder and
Geoffrey Dreddlington?" and he mentioned the date and names of all the
parties to the deed of confirmation. Mr. Parkinson handed in the
important document.

"Stay, stay; where did you get that deed, Mr. Parkinson?" inquired Mr.
Subtle, sharply, extending his hand for the deed.

"From my office at Grilston, where I keep many of Mr. Aubrey's
title-deeds."

"When did you bring it hither?"

"About ten o'clock last night, for the purpose of this trial."

"How long has it been at your office?"

"Ever since I fetched it, a year or two ago, with other deeds from the
muniment room of Yatton Hall."

"How long have you been solicitor to Mr. Aubrey?"

"For this ten years; and my father was solicitor to his father for
twenty-five years."

"Will you swear that this deed was in your office before the
proceedings in this action were brought to your notice?"

"I have not the slightest doubt in the world."

"That does not satisfy me, sir. Will you _swear_ that it was?"

"I _will_, sir," replied Mr. Parkinson, firmly. "It never attracted any
more notice from me than any other of Mr. Aubrey's deeds, till my
attention was drawn to it in consequence of these proceedings."

"Has any one access to Mr. Aubrey's deeds at your office but yourself?"

"None that I know of; I keep all the deeds of my clients which are at my
office, in their respective boxes; and allow no one access to them,
except under my immediate notice, and in my presence."

Then Mr. Subtle sat down.

"My Lord, we now propose to put in this deed," said the
Attorney-General, unfolding it.

"Allow me to look at it, Mr. Attorney," said Mr. Subtle. It was handed
to him; and he, his juniors, and Mr. Mortmain, rising up, were engaged
most anxiously in scrutinizing it for some minutes. Mortmain having
looked at the stamp, sat down, and opening his bag, hastily drew out an
old well-worn volume which contained all the stamp acts that had ever
been passed from the time of William the Third, when, I believe, the
first of those blessings was conferred upon this country. First he
looked at the deed--then at his book--then at the deed again; and at
length might be seen, with earnest gestures, putting Mr. Subtle in
possession of some opinion which he had formed on the subject. "My
Lord," said Mr. Subtle, after a pause, "I object to this instrument
being received in evidence, on account of the insufficiency of the
stamp." This produced quite a sensation in court. Mr. Subtle then
proceeded to mention the character of the stamp affixed to the deed,
and read the act which was in force at the time that the deed bore date;
and, after a few additional observations, sat down, and was followed by
Mr. Quicksilver and Mr. Lynx. Then arose the Attorney-General, having in
the mean time carefully looked at the act of Parliament, and submitted
to his Lordship that the stamp was sufficient; being followed by his
juniors. Mr. Subtle replied at some length.

"I certainly entertain some difficulty on the point," said his Lordship,
"and will mention the matter to my brother Grayley." Taking with him the
deed, and Mr. Mortmain's copy of the stamp acts, his Lordship left the
court, and was absent a quarter of an hour--half an hour--three quarters
of an hour; and at length returned.

"I have consulted," said his Lordship, as soon as he had taken his seat
amid the profoundest silence, "my brother Grayley, and we have very
fully considered the point. My brother happens, fortunately, to have by
him a manuscript note of a case in which he was counsel, about eighteen
years ago, and in which the exact point arose which exists in the
present case." He then read out of a thick manuscript book, which he had
brought with him from Mr. Justice Grayley, the particulars of the case
alluded to, and which were certainly almost precisely similar to those
then before the court. In the case referred to, the stamp had been held
sufficient; and so, his Lordship and his brother Grayley were of
opinion, was the stamp in the deed then before him. The cloud which had
settled upon the countenances of the Attorney-General and his party,
here flitted over to, and settled upon, those of his opponents. "Your
Lordship will perhaps take a note of the objection," said Mr. Subtle,
somewhat chagrined. Lord Widdrington nodded, and immediately made the
requisite entry in his notes.

"_Now_, then, we propose to put in and read this deed," said the
Attorney-General, with a smile of suppressed triumph, holding out his
hand towards Mr. Lynx, who was scrutinizing it very eagerly--"I presume
my learned friend will require only the operative parts to be
read"--here Lynx, with some excitement, called his leader's attention to
something which had occurred to him in the deed: up got Quicksilver and
Mortmain; and presently--

"Not quite so fast, Mr. Attorney, if you please," said Mr. Subtle, with
a little elation of manner--"I have another, and I apprehend a clearly
fatal objection to the admissibility of this deed, till my learned
friend shall have accounted for an ERASURE"----

"Erasure!" echoed the Attorney-General, with much surprise--"Allow me to
see the deed;" and he took it with an incredulous smile, which, however,
disappeared as he looked more and more closely at the instrument; Mr.
Sterling, Mr. Crystal, and Mr. Mansfield also looking extremely serious.

"I've hit them _now_," said Mr. Subtle to those behind him, as he leaned
back, and looked with no little triumph at his opponents--"_Was_ there
ever anything so lucky in this world before?" From what apparently
inadequate and trifling causes often flow great results! The plain fact
of the case was merely this. The attorney's clerk, in copying out the
deed, which was one of considerable length, had written eight or ten
words by mistake; and fearing to exasperate his master, by rendering
necessary a new deed and stamp, and occasioning trouble and delay, had
neatly scratched out the erroneous words, and over the erasure written
the correct ones. As he was the party who was intrusted with seeing to
and witnessing the execution of the instrument, he of course took no
notice of the alteration, and--see the result! The ownership of an
estate of ten thousand a-year about to turn upon the effect of this
erasure!

"Hand me up the deed," said the judge; and inspected it minutely for a
minute or two, holding it up, once or twice, to the light.

"Has any one a magnifying-glass in court?" inquired the
Attorney-General, with a look of increasing anxiety. No one happened to
have one.

"Is it necessary, Mr. Attorney?" said Lord Widdrington, handing down the
instrument to him with an ominous look.

"Well--you object, of course, Mr. Subtle--as I understand you--that this
deed is void, on account of an erasure in a material part of it?"
inquired Lord Widdrington.

"That is my objection, my Lord," said Mr. Subtle, sitting down.

"Now, Mr. Attorney," continued the judge, turning to the
Attorney-General, prepared to take a note of any observations which he
might offer. The spectators--the whole court--were aware that the great
crisis of the case had arrived; and there was a sickening silence. The
Attorney-General, with perfect calmness and self-possession, immediately
addressed the court in answer to this very critical and unexpected
objection. That there _was_ an erasure, which, owing to the hurry with
which the instrument had been examined, had been overlooked, was
indisputable. The Attorney-General's argument was, first, that the
erasure was in a part not material; secondly, that even if in a material
part of the deed, it would not be avoided, but the alteration would be
presumed to have taken place before the execution of the deed.[33] It
was easy to see that he spoke with the air of a man who argues _contra
spem_. What he said, however, was pertinent and forcible; the same might
be said of Mr. Sterling and Mr. Crystal; but they were all plainly
_gravelled_. Mr. Subtle replied with cruel cogency.

"Well," said Lord Widdrington, when Mr. Subtle had concluded, "I own I
feel scarcely any doubt upon the matter; but as it is certainly of the
greatest possible importance in the present case, I will just see how it
strikes my brother Grayley." With this he took the deed in his hand and
quitted the court. He touched Mr. Aubrey, in passing to his private
room, holding the deed before him! After an absence of about ten
minutes, Lord Widdrington returned.

"Silence! silence there!" bawled the crier; and the bustle had soon
subsided into profound silence.

"I think, and my brother Grayley agrees with me," said Lord Widdrington,
"that I ought not to receive this deed in evidence, unless the erasure
occurring in an essential part of it be first accounted for. Unless,
therefore, you are prepared, Mr. Attorney, with any evidence of that
kind, I shall not receive the deed." The Attorney-General bowed, in
silence, to his Lordship.

There was a faint buzz all over the court--a buzz of excitement,
anxiety, and disappointment; during which the Attorney-General consulted
for a moment or two with his juniors.

"Undoubtedly, my Lord," said he at length, "we are not prepared with any
evidence to explain a circumstance which has taken us entirely by
surprise. After this length of time, my Lord, of course"----

"Certainly--it is a great misfortune for the parties--a great
misfortune. Of course you tender the deed in evidence?" he continued,
taking a note.

"We do, my Lord, certainly," replied the Attorney-General; and sitting
down, he and his juniors took a note of the decision; Lord Widdrington
and the Attorney-General's opponents doing the same.

You should have seen the faces of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, as
they looked at Mr. Parkinson, with an agitated air, returning the
rejected deed to the bag from which it had been lately taken with so
confident and triumphant an air!--The remainder of the case, which had
been opened by the Attorney-General on behalf of Mr. Aubrey, was then
proceeded with; but in spite of all their assumed calmness, the
disappointment and distress of his counsel were perceptible to all. They
were now dejected--they felt that the cause was lost, unless some
extraordinary good fortune should yet befall them. They were not long in
establishing the descent of Mr. Aubrey from Geoffrey Dreddlington. It
was necessary to do so; for grievously as they had been disappointed in
failing to establish the title paramount, founded upon the deed of
confirmation of Mr. Aubrey, it was yet an important question for the
jury, whether they believed the evidence adduced by the plaintiff to
show title in himself.

"That, my Lord, is the defendant's case," said the Attorney-General as
his last witness left the box; and Mr. Subtle then rose to reply. He
felt how unpopular was his cause; that almost every countenance around
him bore a hostile expression. Privately, he loathed his case, when he
saw the sort of person for whom he was struggling. All his sympathies
(he was a very proud, haughty man) were on behalf of Mr. Aubrey, whom by
name and reputation he well knew, and with whom he had often sat in the
House of Commons. Now, conspicuous before him, sat his little
monkey-client, Titmouse--a ridiculous object; and calculated, if there
were any scope for the influence of prejudice, to ruin his own cause by
the exhibition of himself before the jury. That was the vulgar idiot who
was to turn the admirable Aubreys out of Yatton, and send them beggared
into the world! But Mr. Subtle was a high-minded English advocate; and
if he had seen Miss Aubrey in all her loveliness, and knew that her
_all_ depended upon the success of his exertions, he could hardly have
exerted himself more strenuously than he did on the present occasion.
And such, at length, was the effect which that exquisitely skilful
advocate produced, in his address to the jury, that he began to bring
about a change in the feelings of most around him; even the eye of
scornful beauty began to direct fewer glances of indignation and disgust
upon Titmouse, as Mr. Subtle's irresistible rhetoric drew upon their
sympathies in that young gentleman's behalf. "My learned friend, the
Attorney-General, gentlemen, dropped one or two expressions of a
somewhat disparaging tendency," said Mr. Subtle, "in alluding to my
client, Mr. Titmouse; and shadowed forth a disadvantageous contrast
between the obscure and ignorant plaintiff, and the gifted defendant.
Good heavens, gentlemen! and is my humble client's misfortune to become
his fault? If he be obscure and ignorant, unacquainted with the usages
of society, deprived of the blessings of a superior education--if he
have contracted vulgarity, _whose fault is it_?--Who has occasioned it?
Who plunged him and his parents before him into an unjust poverty and
obscurity, from which Providence is about this day to rescue him, and
put him in possession of his own? Gentlemen, if topics like these must
be introduced into this case, I ask you _who is accountable_ for the
present condition of my unfortunate client? Is he, or are those who have
been, perhaps unconsciously, but still unjustly, so long revelling in
the wealth which is his? Gentlemen, in the name of everything that is
manly and generous, I challenge your sympathy, your commiseration, for
my client." Here Titmouse, who had been staring open-mouthed for some
time at his eloquent advocate, and could be kept quiet no longer by the
most vehement efforts of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, rose up in an
excited manner, exclaiming, "Bravo! bravo, bravo, sir! 'Pon my life,
capital! It's quite true--bravo! bravo!" His astounded advocate paused
at this unprecedented interruption. "Take the puppy out of court, sir,
or I will not utter one word more," said he, in a fierce whisper to Mr.
Gammon.

"Who is that? Leave the court, sir! Your conduct is most indecent, sir!
I have a great mind to commit you, sir!" said Lord Widdrington,
directing an awful look down to the offender, who had turned of a
ghastly whiteness.

"Have mercy upon me, my Lord! I'll never do it again," he groaned,
clasping his hands, and verily believing that Lord Widdrington was going
to take the estate away from him.

Snap at length succeeded in getting him out of court, and after the
excitement occasioned by this irregular interruption had subsided, Mr.
Subtle resumed:--

"Gentlemen," said he, in a low tone, "I perceive that you are moved by
this little incident; and it is characteristic of your superior
feelings. Inferior persons, destitute of sensibility or refinement,
might have smiled at eccentricities, which occasion gentlemen like
yourselves only feelings of greater commiseration. I protest,
gentlemen"---- his voice trembled for a moment, but he soon resumed his
self-possession; and, after a long and admirable address, sat down,
confident of the verdict.

"If we lose the verdict, sir," said he, bending down and whispering into
the ear of Gammon, "we may thank that execrable little puppy for it."
Gammon changed color, but made no reply.

Lord Widdrington then commenced summing up the case to the jury with his
usual care and perspicacity. Nothing could be more beautiful than the
ease with which he extricated the facts of the case from the meshes in
which they had been alternately involved by Mr. Subtle and the
Attorney-General. As soon as he had explained to them the general
principles of law applicable to the case, he placed before them the
facts proved by the plaintiff, and then the answer of the defendant:
every one in court trembling for the result, if the jury should take the
same view which he felt compelled himself to take. The judge suggested
that they should retire to consider the case, taking with them the
pedigrees which had been handed in to them; and added that, if they
should require his assistance, he should remain in his private room for
an hour or two. Both judge and jury then retired, it being about eight
o'clock. Candles were lit in the court, which continued crowded to
suffocation. Few doubted which way the verdict would go. Fatigued as
must have been most of the spectators with a two days' confinement and
excitement,--ladies as well as gentlemen,--scarce a person thought of
quitting before the verdict had been pronounced. After an hour and a
half's absence, a cry was heard from the bailiff in whose charge the
jury had retired--"Clear the way for the jury;" and one or two officers,
with their wands, obeyed the directions. As the jury were re-entering
their box, struggling with a little difficulty through the crowd, Lord
Widdrington resumed his seat upon the bench.

"Gentlemen of the jury, have the goodness," said the associate, "to
answer to your names.--_Sir Godolphin Fitzherbert_"---- and, while their
names were thus called over, all the counsel took their pens, and,
turning over their briefs with an air of anxiety, prepared to indorse on
them the verdict. As soon as all the jurymen had answered, a profound
silence ensued.

"Gentlemen of the jury," inquired the associate, "are you agreed upon
your verdict? Do you find for the plaintiff, or for the defendant?"

"FOR THE PLAINTIFF," replied the foreman; on which the officer, amid a
kind of blank dismayed silence, making at the same time some
hieroglyphics upon the record, muttered--"_Verdict for the
Plaintiff.--Damages, one shilling. Costs, forty shillings_;" while
another functionary bawled out, amid the increasing buzz in the court,
"Have the goodness to wait, gentlemen of the jury. You will be paid
immediately." Whereupon, to the disgust and indignation of the unlearned
spectators, and the astonishment of some of the gentlemen of the jury
themselves--many of them the very first men of the county--Snap jumped
up on the form, pulled out his purse with an air of wild exultation, and
proceeded to remunerate Sir Godolphin Fitzherbert and his companions
with the sum of two guineas each. Proclamation was then made, and the
court adjourned till the next morning.




NOTES.


Note 1. Page 11.

Thomas De Quincey--a man whose genius and diversified and profound
acquirements constitute him one of the most remarkable men of the age;
and the book quoted in the text is worthy of him.


Note 2. Page 20.

The legislature hath since shown many indications of agreement with the
opinion of my unhappy swell: having lately abolished arrest on _mesne_
process altogether, as affording creditors too serious a chance of
preventing the escape of a fraudulent debtor; and having still more
recently made a step towards the abolition of arrest on _final_ process!
[1844.]


Note 3. Page 60.

Τοῡ καὶ ἀπὸ γλώσσης μέλιτος γλυκίων ῥέεν αὐή.


Note 4. Page 107.

_Blackstone's Commentaries_, vol. iv. pp. 134-5.


Note 5. Page 108.

_Blackstone_, vol. iii. p. 400, where it is stated, however, that "that
practice is now disused."


Note 6. Page 110.

_Blackstone's Commentaries_, vol. iv. p. 135.


Note 7. Page 113.

By a very recent statute (6 and 7 Vict. c. 73, §§ 37, 43)--passed in
1843--salutary alterations have been made in the law regulating the
taxation of the bills of attorneys and solicitors. Except "under special
circumstances," a client cannot now have his attorney's or solicitor's
bill taxed, after the lapse of twelve months since it was delivered. If
as much as one-sixth of the bill be struck off, the attorney or
solicitor must pay the costs of the operation; if less than one-sixth,
the client will have that satisfaction.


Note 8. Page 122.

This was written about the year 1838-9.


Note 9. Page 124.

This mode of treating the remains of a _felo de se_ was (on the 8th July
1823) abolished by Act of Parliament (stat. 4 Geo. IV). The remains of a
_felo de se_ are ordered by that act to be buried privately in the
churchyard, but without the performance of any rites of Christian
burial. The Prayer-book also prohibits the "office for the burial of the
dead from being used for any that have laid violent hands upon
themselves."


Note 10. Page 160.

I suppose myself to be alluding here to a very oppressive statute,
passed to clip the wings of such gentlemen as Mr. Snap, by which it is
enacted that, in actions for slander, if the jury find a verdict under
forty shillings, _e. g._ as in the case in the text, for one farthing,
the plaintiff shall be entitled to recover from the defendant only as
much costs as damages, _i. e._ another farthing; a provision which has
made many a poor pettifogger sneak out of court with a flea in his ear.
Since this was written, a still more stringent statute hath been made,
which, 'tis to be hoped, will put down the nuisance.


Note 11. Page 196.

"Can the author of Ten Thousand a-Year," asked some anonymous person
during its original appearance--"point out any class of Dissenters who
allow their members to frequent theatres?" The author believes that this
is the case with Unitarians--and also with many of the members of other
Dissenting congregations--especially the younger members of even the
stanchest Dissenting families.


Note 12. Page 212.

This fearful-looking word, I wish to inform my lady-readers, is an
original and monstrous amalgamation of three or four Greek
words--κυανο-χαιτ-ανθρωπο-ποιων--denoting a fluid "_which can render the
human hair black_." Whenever a barber or perfumer determines on trying
to puff off some villanous imposition of this sort, strange to say, he
goes to some starving scholar, and gives him half-a-crown to coin a word
like the above; one which shall be equally unintelligible and
unpronounceable, and therefore attractive and popular.


Note 13. Page 243.

    "Vitas hinnuleo me similis, Chloë,
    Quærenti pavidam----
    Matrem.
    ---- et corde et genibus tremit."--Hor. i. 23.


Note 14. Page 264.

See _ante_, p. 138.


Note 15. Page 307.

So much curiosity has been excited among lay readers in this country and
in America, and also among professional persons in France and Germany,
as to the real nature of the species of action mentioned in the text,
that the author is induced here to give some further account of a matter
which enters so considerably into the construction of this story. The
action of Ejectment is described with minute accuracy in the text; has
been in existence for at least five hundred years, (_i. e._ since the
close of Edward II., or beginning of Edward III., A. D. 1327;) and its
venerable but tortuous fiction has been scarcely even touched by the
"amending hand," which lately (1834) cut away so many cumbrous,
complicated, and _quasi_ obsolete portions of the law of action, (see
Stat. 3 and 4 Will. 4, c. 27, § 36.) The progress of this action is
calculated to throw much light on some of our early history and
jurisprudence. See an interesting sketch of it in the first chapter of
Mr. Sergeant Adams' Treatise on Ejectment. It was resorted to for the
purpose of escaping from the other dilatory, intricate, and expensive
modes of recovering landed property anciently in existence. The
following is the description given of it by Lord Mansfield--and is
equally terse and correct, and applicable to the present mode of
procedure. "An EJECTMENT is an ingenious _fiction_ for the Trial of
Titles to the possession of Land. In _form_ it is a trick between two,
to dispossess a third by a sham suit and judgment. The artifice would be
criminal, unless the _Court_ converted it into a _fair_ trial with the
_proper_ party. The control the Court have over the judgment against the
Casual Ejector, enables them to put any _terms_ upon the plaintiff which
are _just_. He was soon ordered to give _notice_ to the _tenant in
possession_. When the tenant in possession _asked_ to be admitted
defendant, the Court was enabled to add CONDITIONS; and therefore
obliged him to _allow_ the fiction, and go to Trial on the _real
merits_."--(_Fair Claim_ v. _Sham Title_,[*] 3 Burr. 1294.) This action
is now, in effect, the only direct common-law remedy for the recovery of
land in England and Ireland; in many of the United States of America the
action of Ejectment is retained--"with its harmless, and--as matter of
history--curious and amusing English fictions."--(4 _Kent's Comment_. p.
70, note _e_:) but in New York, the action of Ejectment is "stripped of
all its fictitious parts."--(_Id. ib._)

[*] These fantastical names are now almost invariably abandoned for
those of "John Doe" and "Richard Roe."


Note 16. Page 309.

_Blackstone's Commentaries_, vol. iii. App. pp. ix. x.


Note 17. Page 310.

"A warranty will not extend to guard against defects which are plainly
and obviously the object of one's senses: as if a horse be warranted
perfect, and wants either a _tail_, or an _ear_: unless the buyer in
this case be blind."--3 _Blackst. Comm_. 166.


Note 18. Page 310.

On the 22d August, 1843, (since the publication of this work,) a brief
but most important statute (6 and 7 Vict. c. 85) was enacted, "for
improving the Law of Evidence"--the chief object of which was, to remove
all such difficulties as that which formed the subject of Mr.
Parkinson's inquiries. Witnesses are now no longer "incompetent" to give
evidence by reason of _crime_ or of any _interest_ which they may have
in, or in respect of, the subject-matter of the action.


Note 19. Page 346.

Whether Mr. Aubrey was _justified_ in doing this, under his
circumstances, is a question which the author has seen, and heard,
several times keenly discussed. It is surprising how much may be said on
both sides of the question, by ingenious casuists.


Note 20. Page 405.

For this glorious and inestimable safeguard of the liberty of the
subject, we are indebted to the ancient common law of England,
strengthened from time to time by the legislature, and now made secure
against the insidious encroachments of tyranny. The chief statute passed
with this view is known as _The Habeas Corpus Act_ (31 Car. II. c. 2),
and "has been incorporated into the jurisprudence of every state in the
Union" in America.--STORY, _Commentaries on the Constitution of the U.
S._, vol. iii. p. 208.

"It is a very common mistake," says Mr. Hallam, and the Lord
Chief-Justice of the Queen's Bench had occasion, during Michaelmas Term
1844, publicly to make a similar observation, "not only among
foreigners, but many from whom some knowledge of our constitutional laws
might be expected, that the statute of Charles II. enlarged in a great
degree our liberties, and forms a sort of epoch in their history; but
though a very beneficial enactment, it introduced no new principle, nor
conferred any right upon the subject.... It was not to bestow an
immunity from arbitrary imprisonment, which is abundantly provided in
Magna Charta (if, indeed, not much more ancient,) that the statute of
Charles II. was enacted; but to cut off the abuses by which the
government's lust of power, and the servile subtlety of crown lawyers,
had impaired so fundamental a privilege."--3 HALL. _Const. Hist._, pp.
16, 17.


Note 21. Page 421.

The general character of the Newspaper Press, both in London and the
country, has so greatly improved of late years, as (with a very few
despicable exceptions) to render the appearance now-a-days, of such a
paragraph as that in the text, exceedingly rare. The Press is now, in
most instances, presided over by educated and gifted _gentlemen_. It was
far otherwise in 18--(the period named in the text.)


Note 22. Page 433.

Before perusing this opinion, the reader should refer to the pedigree,
_post_ 441; without which the opinion will not be fully understood.


Note 23. Page 435.

See the note on page 437.


Note 24. Page 437.

Till within a few years before the period in question, the law of
England regarded the act done by Mr. Steggars as amounting only to a
_breach of trust_, and consequently subjecting him to no _criminal_
liability; on the ground that the £700 _never having been actually in
his master's possession_, could not be the subject of a _felonious
taking_. The alarming consequences of this doctrine led to the passing
of stat. 39 Geo. III. c. 85, [passed on the 12th July 1799,] which
declared such an act of embezzlement to be felony, punishable with
fourteen years' transportation: this was lately repealed, but re-enacted
by stat. 7 and 8, Geo. IV. c. 29, § 47, [passed on the 21st June, 1827,]
on the occasion of consolidating that branch of the criminal law.--See 4
COLERIDGE'S _Blackst. Comment._ p. 231 (_note_).


Note 25. Page 442.

The popular maxim that "possession is nine-tenths of the law," is
founded on the salutary and reasonable doctrine of the law, that the
party _in possession_ of property is presumed to be the owner until the
contrary shall have been proved. Consider how intolerable, and, in fact,
destructive of civil society would be an opposite rule--if every one in
the enjoyment of property were liable to be called upon to explain to
any one challenging his right, how that right had been acquired! By the
operation of the rule laid down in the text, a defendant in ejectment
may (except in the case of landlord and tenant) always defeat the
action, simply by showing the real title to be in _some third
party_--without showing that the defendant holds possession with the
consent, or under the authority of the real owner.--(_Roe_ v. _Harvey_,
4 Burr. 2484; _Doe_ v. _Barber_, 2 T. R. 749.) The defendant's evidence
is thus altogether confined to falsifying his adversary's proofs, or
rebutting the presumptions which arise out of them.--ADAMS _on
Ejectment_, p. 319.--(3d Ed.)


Note 26. Page 443.

See the note to Vol. II., Chapter V.


Note 27. Page 443.

Lynx is here glancing at a rule of the Roman law on a point of great
difficulty, interest, and importance--_i. e._ where two persons above
the age of puberty perished by the same accident, the younger was
presumed to have been the survivor; but if one was _under_ the age of
puberty, the other was presumed to have been the survivor.--(Dig. lib.
34, tit. 5, §§ 9, 22, 23.) It is very curious to see how this question
is dealt with in modern times. The _Code Civile_ (in France) adjusts the
presumption to specific periods of life. If those who perished were all
under 15 years of age, the eldest is presumed to have survived; if all
above 60 years, the youngest. If some under 15, and others above 60, the
former shall be presumed to have survived. If all were between 15 and 60
years of age, the male, (when the ages are equal, or within a year of
being so) shall be presumed the survivor. If of the same sex, that
presumption shall be admitted which opens the succession in the order of
nature--of course the younger being presumed to have survived the
elder.--(_Code Civ_. §§ 720-722.) It has been objected, that, though
these rules are generally equitable, they are imperfect: for a man above
sixty ought surely to be held to have survived a mere infant; and no
provision is made for the case of persons under 15, and under 60 years
of age perishing together. By the _Mohammedan law of India_, "when
relations perish together, it is to be presumed that they all died at
the same moment, and the heir of each immediately succeeds." The
difficulty of the case arises, of course, from the circumstance of there
being no evidence whatever as to the _actual fact_ of survivorship. Our
English law has not adopted any definite rule on the subject, but leans
in favor of the survivorship of the party possessed of the property in
dispute; and _some_ regard seems to be had to the probability of the
survivorship of the stronger party. Several very interesting cases of
this kind have arisen in this country; and, generally speaking, our
courts appear to have required some evidence of the _fact_. A singular
case occurred in Queen Elizabeth's time, (1596.) Father and son were
hanged at the same time, in one cart; being joint tenants of property,
which, on their death, was to go to the _son's_ heirs. According to one
report (Noy) the _father's_ feet were seen moving after the son's
death; but other witnesses swore to the son's "shaking his legs" after
his father's death. This the jury believed; found that the son survived;
and his widow was therefore held entitled to her dower!--(_Broughton_ v.
_Randall_, Cro. El., p. 502.)


Note 28. Page 443.

Chapter X., _ante_, p. 411.


Note 29. Page 470.

See the note prefixed to Chapter V. Vol. II., for a full explanation of
the above, and another important legal topic introduced into this work.


Note 30. Page 477.

Not many years ago, the fate of an important case turned upon the
existence of a tombstone: and a forged one was produced in court!--The
validity of a great Peerage case is at this moment depending upon the
genuineness of one of these dumb and gloomy witnesses. [1844.]


Note 31. Page 485.

When the Judges of Assize preside in the _Crown_ side (_i. e_. in the
Criminal Court,) they wear their scarlet and ermine robes, and
full-bottomed wigs.


Note 32. Page 486.

This is a step often taken in trials of importance, when the counsel for
either party apprehends danger to his client, from his opponent's
witnesses remaining in court and hearing all the evidence which they are
afterwards called to contradict. Either counsel has a _right_ thus to
exclude witnesses. The Court usually, in such cases, orders all the
witnesses to withdraw.


Note 33. Page 499.

See, for a discussion of this point, the preliminary note to Vol. II.
ch. v.

END OF VOL. I.





End of Project Gutenberg's Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 1., by Samuel Warren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. VOLUME 1. ***

***** This file should be named 31004-0.txt or 31004-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/0/0/31004/

Produced by David Cortesi, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ten Thousand a-Year (Vol. 2), by Samuel Warren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ten Thousand a-Year (Vol. 2)

Author: Samuel Warren

Release Date: November 9, 2012 [EBook #41332]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR (VOL. 2) ***




Produced by Matthias Grammel, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









            TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.

                 VOL. II.




  [Illustration: JE LE TIENS

        The Crest and Coat of Arms of
         Tittlebat Titmouse Esq M P
       according to the description of
  Sir Gorgeous Tintack, Garter King at Arms]




                   TEN

             THOUSAND A-YEAR.


                   BY

          SAMUEL WARREN, F.R.S.


                VOL. II.



                BOSTON:
      LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.
                 1900.




           University Press:
    JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




CONTENTS TO VOL. II.


   CHAP.                                                          PAGE

      I. After the battle.--The behavior of the belligerents;
           and an adventurous project of Mr. Gammon's                1

     II. The last chance; and some profitable reflections.--A
           Quixote; and a friendly statesman, but with an
           eye to business                                          31

    III. Mr. Aubrey surrenders at discretion; and the opposing
           generals hold a council of war.--A glimpse of the
           Reverend Dismal Horror; and Mr. Quirk's entertainment
           to Mr. and Mrs. Tag-rag                                  60

     IV. Mr. Titmouse's magnificent kinsman, the Right Honorable
           the Earl of Dreddlington, G. C. B.--Farewell to
           Yatton!                                                  89

      V. Mr. Titmouse's first introduction to very high life
           indeed.--A dinner with an Earl, in Grosvenor
           Square                                                  134

     VI. Mr. Titmouse at Yatton, and the splendid festivities
           attending his inauguration                              170

    VII. A gentleman in difficulties pondering his position and
           prospects; never despair.--The Attorney-General,
           and Mr. Weasel, special pleader.--Suspense and
           trepidation                                             209

   VIII. Mr. Aubrey's interview with Mr. Gammon; followed
           by some philosophical reflections on life.--Messrs.
           Yahoo and Fitz-Snooks _versus_ Titmouse; and Gammon
           _versus_ them all.--Tippetiwink                         251

     IX. Titmouse become a great lion.--The Marquis Gants-Jaunes
           de Millefleurs; and the Reverend Morphine
           Velvet.--Mr. Titmouse presented at court after a
           slight accident to the Earl of Dreddlington             304

      X. A drop of the golden shower falls on Mr. Tag-rag, who
           receives promotion.--Mr. Titmouse receives the
           Earl of Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia, the Marquis
           Gants-Jaunes de Millefleurs, Mr. Venom Tuft, and
           Mr. Gammon, at Yatton.--Mr. Gammon and the
           Earl of Dreddlington.--Sapping and Mining.--Lady
           Cecilia and her three lovers; with her father's
           masterly diplomacy in favor of one of them              345

     XI. Mr. Aubrey in deep waters, where he meets with a
           companion.--News from Dr. Tatham                        399

    XII. A communication from Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
           Snap.--Mr. Gammon in Vivian Street, after the
           manner of a snake in a dove-cote.--Mr. Quirk's
           contemplated action for breach of promise of
           marriage                                                429

   XIII. How Mr. Titmouse courted the Lady Cecilia.--Mr.
           Titmouse stands for the borough of Yatton, but
           unexpectedly encounters a formidable opponent           461


   NOTES                                                           485




            TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.




CHAPTER I.


"The Attorney-General did his work very fairly, I thought--eh, Lynx?"
said Mr. Subtle, as arm-in-arm with Mr. Lynx, he quitted the
Castle-gates, each of them on his way to their respective lodgings, to
prepare for the next day's work.

"Yes--he's a keen hand, to be sure: he's given us _all_ work enough; and
I must say, it's been a capital set-to between you! I'm _very_ glad you
got the verdict!"

"It wouldn't have done to be beaten on one's own dung-hill, as it
were--eh? By the way, Lynx, that was a good hit of yours about the
erasure--I ought, really, if it had occurred to me at the time, to have
given you the credit of it--'twas entirely yours, Lynx, I must say."

"Oh, no!"--replied Lynx, modestly. "It was a mere accident my lighting
on it; the merit was, the use you made of it!"

"To think of ten thousand a-year turning on that same trumpery
erasure!"----

"But are you sure of our verdict on that ground, Mr. Subtle? Do you
think Lord Widdrington was right in rejecting that deed?"[1]

"Right? to be sure he was! But I own I got rather uneasy at the way the
Attorney-General put it--that the estate had once been vested, and
could not be subsequently de-vested by an alteration or blemish in the
instrument evidencing the passing of the estate--eh? that was a good
point, Lynx."

"Ay, but as Lord Widdrington put it--that could be only where the defect
was proved to exist after a complete and valid deed had been once
established."

"True--true; that's the answer, Lynx; here, you see, the deed is
disgraced in the first instance; no proof, in fact, that it ever _was_ a
deed--therefore, mere waste paper."

"To be sure, _possession_ has gone along with the deed"----

"Possession gone along with it!--What then?--That is to say, the man who
has altered it, to benefit himself and his heirs, keeps it snugly in his
own chest--and then that is of itself to be sufficient to"----

"Ay--but what I'm afraid of, is this: that the presumption of forgery
arising from the alteration, is overcome by the presumption to the
contrary, arising from long-continued and consistent possession!--On the
other hand, however, it is certainly a general rule that the party
producing an instrument must account for the appearance of erasure or
alteration, to encounter the presumption of fraud!--I must say _that_
seems good sense enough!"...

"It's really been a very interesting cause," said Mr. Subtle.

"Very. Some capital points--that of Mortmain's on the stamp act"----

"Pish, Lynx! there's nothing in it! I meant the cause itself has been an
interesting one--uncommonly."

Mr. Subtle suddenly paused and stood still. "God bless my soul,
Lynx--I've made a blunder!"

"Eh!"

"Yes--by Jove, a blunder! Never did such a thing since I've led a cause
before!"

"A blunder? Impossible!--What is it?" inquired Lynx, briskly, pricking
up his ears.

"It will be at least thirty or forty pounds out of our client's pocket.
I forgot to ask Widdrington for the certificate for the costs of the
special jury. I protest I never did such a thing before--I'm quite
annoyed--I hate to _overlook_ anything."

"Oh! is that all?" inquired Lynx, much relieved--"then it's all right!
While you were speaking to Mr. Gammon, immediately after the verdict had
been given, I turned towards Quicksilver to get him to ask for the
certificate--but he had seen a man with the new 'Times' containing the
Division on the Catholic claims, and had set off after him--so I took
the liberty, as you seemed very earnestly talking to Mr. Gammon, to name
it to the judge--and it's all right."

"Capital!--Then there isn't a single point missed!--And in a good two
days' fight that's something."

"D'ye think we shall keep the verdict, and get its fruits?"

"We shall keep the verdict, I've no doubt; there's nothing in
Widdrington's notes that we need be afraid of--but of course the Aubreys
will put us to bring another ejectment, perhaps several."

"Yes--certainly--there _must_ be a good deal of fighting before such a
property as Yatton changes hands," replied Lynx, with a complacent air;
for he saw a few pleasant pickings in store for him. "By the way," he
continued, "our client's a sweet specimen of humanity, isn't he?"

"Faugh! odious little reptile! And did you ever in all your life witness
such a scene as when he interrupted me in the way he did?"

"Ha, ha! Never! But, upon my honor, what an exquisite turn you gave the
thing--it was worth more than called it forth--it was admirable."

"Pooh--Lynx!" said Mr. Subtle, with a gratified air; "knack--mere
knack--nothing more. My voice trembled--eh?--at least so I intended."

"Upon my soul, I almost believed you were for the moment overcome, and
going to shed tears."

"Ah, ha, ha!--Delightful! I was convulsed with inward laughter! _Shed
tears!!_ Did the bar take it, Lynx?" inquired Mr. Subtle; for though he
hated display, he loved _appreciation_, and by competent persons. "By
the way, Lynx, the way in which you've got up the whole case does you
vast credit--that opinion of yours on the evidence was--upon my
word--the most masterly"--here he suddenly ceased and squeezed his
companion's arm, motioning him thereby to silence. They had come up with
two gentlemen, walking slowly, and conversing in a low tone, but with
much earnestness of manner. They were, in fact, Mr. Aubrey and Lord De
la Zouch. Mr. Subtle and Mr. Lynx crossed over to the other side of the
narrow street, and quickened their pace, so as soon to be out of sight
and hearing of the persons they seemed desirous of avoiding. Mr. Subtle
was, indeed, unable to bear the sight of the man whom his strenuous and
splendid exertions during the last two days had tended to strip of his
all--to thrust from the bright domain of wealth, prosperity,
distinction, into--as it were--outer darkness--the outer darkness of
poverty--of destitution.

"It's rather a nuisance for the Aubreys--isn't it?" quoth the
matter-of-fact Lynx.

"It's quite frightful!"--replied Mr. Subtle, in a tone of voice and with
a manner which showed how deeply he felt what he uttered. "And it's not
only what Mr. Aubrey will lose, but what he will be liable to--the
mesne profits--sixty thousand pounds."

"Oh!--you think, then, that we can't go beyond the _statute of
limitations_?--Eh?--is that so clear?" Mr. Subtle looked sharply at
Lynx, with an expression it would be difficult to describe.
"Well"--continued the impenetrable Lynx--"at all events, I'll look into
it." He felt about as much _sentiment_ in the matter as a hog eating
acorns would feel interest in the antiquity of the oak from which they
fell, and under whose venerable shade he was munching and stuffing
himself.

"By the way, Lynx--aren't you with me in _Higson and Mellington_?"

"Yes--and it stands first for to-morrow morning!"

"I've not opened my papers, and--why, we've a consultation fixed for ten
o'clock to-night! What's it all about?"

"It's _libel_ against a newspaper editor--the POMFRET COCKATRICE; and
our client's a clergyman. They've slandered him most abominably: they
say he entered the church as a wholesale dealer in tithes--and as to
religion--is an unbeliever and hypocrite!"

"Ay, ay?--that sounds a little like substantial damages!--Do they
_justify_?"[2]

"No--they've pleaded not guilty only."

"Who leads for the defender?"

"Mr. Quicksilver."

"Oh!--very well. We must have the consultation to-morrow morning, at the
Robing-room--ten minutes before the sitting of the court. I'm rather
tired to-night." With this the great leader shook hands with his modest,
learned, laborious junior--and entered his lodgings.

As soon as Titmouse had been ejected from the court, in the summary way
which the reader will recollect, merely on account of his having, with
some slight indecorum, yielded to the mighty impulse of his agitated
feelings, he began to cry bitterly, wringing his hands, and asking every
one about him if they thought he could get in again, because it was
"_his_ case" that was going on. His eyes were red and swollen with
weeping; and his little breast throbbed violently as he walked to and
fro from one door of the court to the other. "Oh, gents, will you get me
in again?" said he, in passionate tones, approaching two gentlemen, who,
with a very anxious and oppressed air, were standing together at the
outside of one of the doors--in fact, Lord De la Zouch and Mr. Aubrey;
and they quickly recognized in Titmouse the gentleman whose claims were
being at that instant mooted within the court. "_Will_ you get me in?
You seem such _respectable_ gents--'Pon my soul I'm going mad! It's my
case that's going on! I'm Mr. Titmouse"----

"We have no power, sir, to get you in," replied Lord De la Zouch,
haughtily: so coldly and sternly as to cause Titmouse involuntarily to
shrink from him.

"The court is crowded to the very door, sir--and we really have no more
right to be present in court, or get others into court, than you have,"
said Mr. Aubrey, with mildness and dignity.

"Thank you, sir! Thank you!" quoth Titmouse, moving with an apprehensive
air away from Lord De la Zouch, towards Mr. Aubrey, "Know quite well who
you are, sir! 'Pon my solemn soul, sir, sorry to do all this; but law's
law, and right's right, all the world over!"

"I _desire_ you to leave us, sir," said Lord De la Zouch, with
irrepressible sternness; "you are very intrusive. How can we catch a
syllable of what is going on while you are chattering in this way?"
Titmouse saw that Mr. Aubrey looked towards him with a very different
expression from that exhibited by his forbidding companion, and would
perhaps have stood his ground, but for a glimpse he caught of a huge,
powdered, broad-shouldered footman, in a splendid livery, one of Lord De
la Zouch's servants, who, with a great thick silver-headed cane in his
hand, was standing at a little distance behind, in attendance on the
carriage, which was in the Castle-yard. This man's face looked so ready
for mischief, that Titmouse slowly walked off. There were a good many
standers-by, who seemed all to look with dislike and distrust at
Titmouse. He made many ineffectual attempts to persuade the doorkeeper,
who had assisted in his extrusion, to readmit him; but the incorruptible
janitor was proof against a sixpence--even against a shilling; and at
length Titmouse gave himself up to despair, and thought himself the most
miserable man in the whole world--as very probably, indeed, he was: for
consider what a horrid interval of suspense he had to endure, from the
closing of Mr. Subtle's speech, till the delivery of the verdict. But at
length, through this portentous and apparently impenetrable cloud burst
the rich sunlight of success.

"Mr. Titmouse!--Mr. Titmouse!--Mr. Tit"----

"Here! Here I am! Here!"--exclaimed the little wretch, jumping off the
window-seat on which he had been sitting for the last hour in the dark,
half-stupefied with grief and exhaustion. The voice which called him was
a blessed voice--a familiar voice--the voice of Mr. Gammon; who, as soon
as the jury had begun to come back, on some pretence or other had
quitted his seat between Quirk and Snap, in order, if the verdict should
be for the plaintiff, to be the very first to communicate it to him. In
a moment or two Mr. Gammon had grasped both Mr. Titmouse's hands. "My
dear, dear Mr. Titmouse, I congratulate you! You are victorious! God
grant you long life to enjoy your good fortune! God bless you,
Titmouse!" He wrung Titmouse's hands--and his voice trembled with the
intensity of his emotions! Mr. Titmouse had grown very white, and for a
while spoke not, but stood staring at Mr. Gammon, as if hardly aware of
the import of his communication.

"No--but--is it so? Honor bright?" at length he stammered.

"It is indeed! My long labors are at length crowned with
success!--Hurrah, hurrah, Mr. Titmouse!"

"I've really _won_? It a'n't a joke or a dream?" inquired Titmouse, with
quickly increasing excitement, and a joyous expression bursting over his
features, which became suddenly flushed.

"A joke?--the best you'll ever have. A dream?--that will last your life.
Thank God, Mr. Titmouse, the battle's ours; we've defeated all their
villany!"

"Tol de rol! Tol de rol! Tol de lol, lol, lol, rido!--Ah," he added in a
loud truculent tone, as Lord De la Zouch and Mr. Aubrey slowly passed
him--"done for you now--'pon my life!--turned the tables!--_that_ for
you!" said he, snapping his fingers; but I need hardly say that he did
so with perfect impunity, as far as those two gentlemen were concerned,
who were so absorbed with the grievous event which had just happened, as
scarcely to be aware of their being addressed at all.

"Aubrey, it's against you--all is lost; the verdict is for the
plaintiff!" said Lord De la Zouch, in a hurried agitated whisper, as he
grasped the hand of Mr. Aubrey, whom he had quitted for an instant to
hear the verdict pronounced. Mr. Aubrey for some moments spoke not.

"God's will be done!" at length said he, in a low tone, or rather in a
faint murmur. More than a dozen gentlemen, who came crowding out,
grasped his hand with fervent energy.

"God bless you, Aubrey! God bless you!" said several voices, their
speakers wringing his hands with great vehemence as they spoke.

"Let us go"--said Lord De la Zouch, putting Mr. Aubrey's arm in his own,
and leading him away from a scene of distressing excitement, too
powerful for his exhausted feelings.

"I am nothing of a fatalist," said Mr. Aubrey, after a considerable
pause, during which they had quitted the Castle-gates, and his feelings
had recovered from the shock which they had just before suffered;--"I am
nothing of a fatalist, but I ought not to feel the least surprise at
this issue, for I have long had a settled conviction that such _would_
be the issue. For some time before I had the least intimation of the
commencement of these proceedings, I was oppressed by a sense of
impending calamity"----

"Well, that may be so; but it does not follow that the mischief is
finally _done_."

"I am certain of it!--But, dear Lord De la Zouch, how much I owe to your
kindness and sympathy!" said Mr. Aubrey, with a slight tremor in his
voice.

"We are at this moment, Aubrey, firmer friends than we ever were before.
So help me Heaven! I would not lose your friendship for the world; I
feel it a greater honor than I am worthy of--I do, indeed," said Lord De
la Zouch, with great emotion.

"There's a great gulf between us, though, Lord De la Zouch, as far as
worldly circumstances are concerned--you a peer of the realm, I a
beggar!"

"Forgive me, Aubrey, but it is idle to talk in that way; I am hurt
beyond measure at your supposing it possible that under any
circumstances"----

"Believe me, I feel the full value of your friendship--more valuable at
this moment than ever!"

"That a serious calamity has fallen upon you is certain;--which of us,
indeed, is safe from such a calamity? But who would bear it with the
calm fortitude which _you_ have already evinced, my dear Aubrey?"

"You speak very kindly, Lord De la Zouch; I trust I shall play the man,
now that the time for playing a man's part has come," said Mr. Aubrey,
with an air of mingled melancholy and resolution. "I feel an
inexpressible consolation in the reflection, that I cannot charge myself
with anything unconscientious; and, as for the future, I put my trust in
God. I feel as if I could submit to the will of Heaven with
cheerfulness"----

"Don't speak so despondingly, Aubrey"----

"Despondingly?" echoed Mr. Aubrey, with momentary
animation--"Despondingly? My dear friend, I feel as if I were indeed
entering a scene black as midnight--but what is it to the _valley of the
shadow of death_, dear Lord De la Zouch, which is before all of us, and
at but a little distance! I assure you I feel no vain-glorious
confidence; yet I seem to be leaning on the arm of an unseen but
all-powerful supporter!"

"You are a hero, my dear Aubrey!" exclaimed Lord De la Zouch, with
sudden fervor.

"And that support will embrace those dearer to me than
life--dearer--far--far"----He ceased; his feelings quite overcame him,
and they walked on for some time in silence. Soon afterwards they
parted--for Lord De la Zouch perceived that his unfortunate companion
wished to be alone. He wrung Mr. Aubrey's hands in silence; and having
turned in the direction of his hotel, Mr. Aubrey made for his lodgings.
The streets were occupied by passengers, some returning from the Castle
after the great trial of the day; others standing here and there, in
little knots, conversing as he passed them; and he felt conscious that
the subject of their thoughts and conversation was himself and his
fallen fortunes. Several deep-drawn sighs escaped him, as he walked on,
the herald of such dismal tidings, to those whom he loved; and he felt
but for that which supported him from within, as it were, a fallen
angel, so far as concerned this world's honors and greatness. The
splendors of human pomp and prosperity seemed rapidly vanishing in the
distance. In the temporary depression of his spirits, he experienced
feelings somewhat akin to those of the heart-sickened exile, whose fond
eyes are riveted upon the mosques and minarets of his native city,
glittering in the soft sunlight of evening, where are the cherished
objects of all his tenderest thoughts and feelings; while his vessel is
rapidly bearing him from it, amid the rising wind, the increasing and
ominous swell of the waters, the thickening gloom of night--_whither_?
The Minster clock struck ten as he passed one of the corners of the vast
majestic structure, gray-glistening in the faint moonlight. The
melodious chimes echoed in his ear, and smote his subdued soul with a
sense of peculiar solemnity and awe; they forced upon him a reflection
upon the transient littleness of earthly things. Then he thought of
those dear beings who were awaiting his return, and a gush of grief and
tenderness overflowed his heart, as he quickened his steps, with an
inward and fervent prayer that Heaven would support them under the
misfortune which had befallen them. As he neared the retired row of
houses where his lodgings were situated, he imagined that he saw some
one near the door, as if on the look-out for his approach; and who, as
he drew nearer, suddenly entered them, and closed the door. This was a
person whom Mr. Aubrey did not at all suspect--it was his worthy friend
Dr. Tatham; who, unable to quit Yatton in time to hear the trial, had
early that morning mounted his horse, and after a long and hard ride,
reached York soon after Mr. Aubrey had set off for the Castle. Though
many of the county people then in York were aware that Mrs. and Miss
Aubrey were also there, a delicate consideration for their exquisitely
distressing situation restrained them from intruding upon their privacy,
which had been evidently sought for by the species of lodgings which
Mr. Aubrey had engaged. On the second day, the excellent Dr. Tatham had
been their welcome and instructive guest, scarce ever leaving them; Mr.
Aubrey's groom bringing word, from time to time, from his master, how
the trial went on. Late in the evening, urged by Kate, the doctor had
gone off to the Castle, to wait till he could bring intelligence of the
final result of the trial. He had not been observed by Mr. Aubrey amid
the number of people who were about; and had at length fulfilled his
mission, and been beforehand with Mr. Aubrey in communicating the
unfortunate issue of the struggle. The instant that Mr. Aubrey had set
his foot within the door, he was locked in the impassioned embrace of
his wife and sister. None of them spoke for some moments.

"Dearest Charles!--we've heard it all--we know it all!" at length they
exclaimed in a breath. "Thank God, it is over at last--and we know the
worst!--Are you well, dearest Charles?" inquired Mrs. Aubrey, with fond
anxiety.

"Thank God, my Agnes, I am well!" said Mr. Aubrey, much excited--"and
thank God that the dreadful suspense is at an end; and also for the
fortitude, my sweet loves, with which you bear the result. And how are
_you_, my excellent friend?" continued he, addressing Dr. Tatham, and
grasping his hands; "my venerable and pious friend--how it refreshes my
heart to see you! as one of the chosen ministers of that God whose
creatures we are, and whose dispensations we receive with reverent
submission!"

"God Almighty bless you all, my dear friends!" replied Dr. Tatham,
powerfully affected. "Believe that all this is from HIM! He has wise
ends in view, though we see not nor comprehend them! _Faint not when you
are rebuked of Him! If ye faint in the day of adversity, your_
_strength is small!_ But I rejoice to see your resignation!"--Aubrey,
his wife, and sister, were for a while overcome with their emotions.

"I assure you all," said Aubrey, "I feel as if a very mountain had been
lifted off my heart! How blessed am I in such a wife and sister!" A
heavenly smile irradiated his pale features--and he clasped his wife,
and then his sister, in his arms. They wept as they tenderly returned
his embrace.

"God," said he, "that gave us all, has taken all: why should we murmur?
He will enable us, if we pray for His assistance, to bear with
equanimity our present adversity, as well as our past prosperity! Come,
Agnes! Kate! play the woman!"

Dr. Tatham sat silent by; but the tears ran down his cheeks. At length
Mr. Aubrey gave them a general account of what had occurred at the
trial--and which, I need hardly say, was listened to in breathless
silence.

"Who is that letter from, love, lying on the table?" inquired Mr.
Aubrey, during a pause in the conversation.

"It's only from Johnson--dearest!--to say the children are quite well,"
replied Mrs. Aubrey. The ruined parents, as if by a common impulse,
looked unutterable things at each other. Then the mother turned deadly
pale; and her husband tenderly kissed her cold cheek; while Kate could
scarcely restrain her feelings. The excitement of each was beginning to
give way before sheer bodily and mental exhaustion; and Dr. Tatham,
observing it, rose to take his departure. It was arranged that the
carriage should be at the door by eight o'clock in the morning, to
convey them back to Yatton--and that Dr. Tatham should breakfast with
them, and afterwards accompany them on horseback. He then took his
departure for the night, with a very full heart; and those whom he had
left, soon afterwards retired for the night; and having first invoked
the mercy and pity of Heaven, sank into slumber and brief forgetfulness
of the perilous position in which they had been placed by the event of
the day.

Somewhat different was the mode in which the night was spent by the
victorious party. Gammon, as has been seen, was the first to
congratulate Titmouse on his splendid success. The next was old
Quirk--who, with a sort of conviction that he should find Gammon
beforehand with him--bustled out of court, leaving Snap to pay the jury,
settle the court-fees, collect the papers, and so forth. Both Quirk and
Snap (as soon as the latter was at liberty) exhibited a courtesy towards
Titmouse which had a strong dash of reverence in it, such as was due to
the possessor of ten thousand a-year; but Gammon exhibited the tranquil
matter-of-fact confidence of a man who had determined to be, and indeed
knew that he _was_, the entire master of Titmouse.

"I--wish you'd call a coach, or something of that sort, gents.--I'm
devilish tired--I am, 'pon my soul!" said Mr. Titmouse, yawning, as he
stood on the steps between Quirk and Gammon, waiting for Snap's arrival.
He was, in fact, almost beside himself--bursting with excitement; and
could not stand still for a moment. Now he whistled loudly, and boldly;
then he hummed a bar or two of some low comic song; and repeatedly drew
on and off his damp gloves, with an air of petulant impetuosity. Now he
ran his hand through his hair with careless grace; and then, with arms
folded on his breast for a moment, looked eagerly, but with a would-be
languid air, at two or three elegant equipages, which, one by one, with
their depressed and disappointed occupants, rolled off. At length, Lord
Widdrington, amid a sharp impetuous cry of "Make way for the judge
there--make way for my Lord!" appeared in his robes, (holding his
three-cornered hat in his hand,) with a wearied air; and passing close
by Titmouse, was honored by him with a very fine bow indeed--his
Lordship not being, however, in the least aware of the fact--as he
passed on to his carriage. The steps were drawn up; the door was closed;
and amid a sharp blast of trumpets, the carriage drove slowly off,
preceded and followed by the usual attendants. All this pomp and
ceremony made a very deep impression upon the mind of Titmouse. "Ah,"
thought he, with a sudden sigh of mingled excitement and
exhaustion--"who knows but _I_ may be a judge some day? It's a devilish
pleasant thing, I'm sure! What a fuss he must make wherever he goes!
'Pon my life, quite delightful!" As there was no coach to be had, Mr.
Titmouse was forced to walk home, arm-in-arm with Mr. Quirk and Mr.
Gammon, and followed, at a little distance, by a knot of persons,
acquainted with his name and person, and feeling towards him a strange
mixture of emotions--dislike, wonder, contempt, admiration. Goodness
gracious! that strange little gentleman was now worth, it was said, ten
thousand a-year; and was squire of Yatton!! Old Quirk shook Titmouse's
hand with irrepressible enthusiasm, at least a dozen times on their way
to the inn; while Gammon now and then squeezed his arm, and spoke, in an
earnest tone, of the difficulties yet to be overcome. On reaching the
inn, the landlady, who was standing at the door, and had evidently been
on the look-out for her suddenly distinguished guest, received him with
several profound courtesies, and eager and respectful inquiries about
his health, as he had had no luncheon--and asking what he would be
pleased to have for his supper. She added, moreover, that fearing his
former bedroom might not have been to his mind, she had changed it, and
he would that night sleep in the very best she had.

"We must make a night on 't, eh?" quoth Mr. Quirk, with an excited air.
His partners assented to it, as did Mr. Titmouse; and cold beef,
sausages, fowl, ham, beefsteaks, and mutton-chops, were ordered to be in
readiness in half an hour's time. Soon afterwards Mr. Titmouse followed
the chambermaid to his new bedroom.

"This is the room we always give to quality folk--when we get them,"
said she, as she set his candle on the drawers, and looked round the
apartment with a little triumph.

"Ah--yes!--'pon my soul--quite right--always do your best for
quality!--Lovely gal--eh?" Here he chucked her under the chin, and
seemed disposed to imprint a kiss upon her cheek; but, with a "Lord
sir--that's not the way quality folks behave!" she modestly withdrew.
Titmouse, left alone, first threw himself on the bed; then started off,
and walked about; then sat down; then danced about; then took off his
coat; then threw himself on the bed again; hummed, whistled, and jumped
up again--in a sort of wild ecstasy, or delirium. In short, it was plain
that he was not master of himself. In fact, his little mind was agitated
by the day's event, like as would be a small green puddle by the
road-side, for a while, on a stone being suddenly flung into it by a
child. While Messrs. Quirk and Snap were, after their sort, as excited
as was even Mr. Titmouse himself, Gammon, retiring to his bedroom, and
ordering thither pens, ink, and paper, sat down and wrote the following
letter:--

                                    "York, 5th April, 18--.

     "MY DEAR SIR,--The very first leisure moment I have, I devote to
     informing you, as one of the most intimate friends of our highly
     respected client, Mr. Titmouse, of the brilliant event which has
     just occurred. After a most severe and protracted struggle of two
     days, (the Attorney-General having come down special on the other
     side,) the jury, many of them the chief gentlemen of the county,
     have within this last hour returned a verdict in favor of our
     friend, Mr. Titmouse--thereby declaring him entitled to the whole
     of the estates at Yatton, (ten thousand a-year rent-roll, at least,)
     and, by consequence, to an immense accumulation of bygone rents,
     which must be made up to him by his predecessor, who, with all his
     powerful party, and in spite of the unscrupulous means resorted to
     to defeat the ends of justice, is dismayed beyond expression at
     the result of this grand struggle--unprecedented in the annals of
     modern litigation. The result has given lively satisfaction in
     these parts--it is plain that our friend Mr. Titmouse will very
     soon become a great _lion_ in society.

     "To you, my dear sir, as an early and valued friend of our
     interesting client, I sit down to communicate the earliest
     intelligence of this most important event; and I trust that you
     will, with our respectful compliments, communicate the happy news
     to your amiable family--who, I am persuaded, must ever feel a
     warm interest in our client's welfare. He is now, naturally enough,
     much excited with his extraordinary good fortune, to which we are
     only too proud and happy to have contributed by our humble, but
     strenuous and long-continued exertions. He begs me to express his
     cordial feelings towards you, and to say that, on his return to
     town, Satin Lodge will be one of the very first places at which he
     will call. In the mean time, I beg you will believe me, my dear sir,
     with the best compliments of myself and partners, yours most
     sincerely,

                                                           "OILY GAMMON.

     "THOMAS TAG-RAG, ESQ.
          &c. &c. &c."

"That, I think, will about do"--quoth Gammon to himself, with a
thoughtful air, as, having made an exact copy of the above letter, he
sealed it up and directed it. He then came down-stairs to supper, having
first sent the letter off to the post-office. What a merry meal was that
same supper! Mr. Titmouse, Mr. Quirk, and Mr. Snap, ate almost to
bursting; Gammon was more abstinent--but, overpowered by the
importunities of his companions, he took a far greater quantity than
usual of the bouncing bottled porter, the hard port, and fiery sherry,
which his companions drank as if they had been but water. Then came in
the spirits--with hot water and cold; and to these all present did ample
justice; in fact, it was very hard for any one to resist the other's
entreaties. Mr. Gammon in due time felt himself _going_--but seemed as
if, on such an occasion, he had no help for it. Every one of the
partners, at different stages of the evening, made--_more suo_--a speech
to Titmouse, and proposed his health; who, of course, replied to each,
and drank the health of each. Presently old Quirk sang a comic song, in
a very dismal key; and then he and Snap joined in a duet called,
"_Handcuff_ v. _Halter_;" at which Gammon laughed heartily, and listened
with that degree of pleased attention, which showed that he had
resolved, for once at least, to abandon himself to the low enjoyment of
the passing hour. Then Titmouse began to speak of what he should do, as
soon as he had "touched the shiners"--his companions entering into all
his little schemes with a sort of affectionate enthusiasm. At length old
Mr. Quirk, after by turns laughing, crying, singing, and talking, leaned
back in his chair, with his half-emptied tumbler of brandy and water in
his hand, and fell fast asleep. Gammon also, in spite of all he could
do, began--the deuce take it!--to feel and exhibit the effects of a
hasty and hearty meal, and his very unusual potations, especially after
such long abstinence and intense anxiety as he had experienced during
the previous two days. He had intended to have seen all his companions
under the table; but he began gradually to feel a want of control over
himself, his thoughts, and feelings, which a little disquieted him, as
he now and then caught glimpses of the extent to which it was
proceeding. "_In vino veritas_," properly translated, means--that
when a man is fairly under the influence of liquor, you see a strong
manifestation of his real character. The vain man is vainer; the
voluble, more voluble; the morose, more morose; the passionate, more
passionate; the detractor, more detracting; the sycophant, more
sycophantic, and so forth. Now Mr. Gammon was a cold, cautious,
long-headed schemer, and as the fumes of liquor mounted up into his
head, they did but increase the action and intensity of those qualities
for which, when sober, he was so pre-eminently distinguished; only that
there was a half-conscious want of coherency and subordination. The
impulse and the habit were present; but there seemed also a strange
disturbing force: in short--what is the use of disguising matters?--Mr.
Gammon was getting very drunk; and he felt very sorry for it--but it was
too late. In due time the dismal effort _not to appear drunk_, ceased--a
vast relief! Silent and more silent he became; more and more observant
of the motions of Snap and Titmouse; more and more complicated and
profound in his schemes and purposes; and at length he felt as if, by
some incomprehensible means, he were attempting to take _himself_
in--inveigling himself: at which point, after a vain attempt to
understand his exact position, with reference to himself, he slowly, but
_rather_ unsteadily, rose from his chair; looked with an unsettled eye
at Titmouse for nearly a minute; a queer smile now and then flitted
across his features; and he presently rang the bell. Boots having obeyed
the summons, Gammon with a turbid brain and cloudy eye followed him to
the door, with a most desperate but unavailing effort to walk thither
steadily. Having reached his room, he sat down with a sort of suspicion
that he had said or done something to commit himself. Vain was the
attempt to wind up his watch; and at length he gave it up, with a faint
curse. With only one stocking off, conceiving himself to be undressed,
after trying four or five times ineffectually to blow out his candle, he
succeeded, and got into bed; his head, however, occupying the place
assigned to his feet. He lay asleep for about half an hour--and then
experienced certain insupportable sensations. He was indeed miserable
beyond description; and lost all thoughts of what would become of
Titmouse--of Quirk and Snap--in his own most desperate indisposition.

"I say, Snap," quoth Titmouse, with a grin, and putting his finger to
his nose, as soon as Gammon had quitted the room in the manner above
described--"Mr. Quirk a'n't much company for us just now, eh? Shall we
go out and have some fun?"

"Walk will do us good--yes. Go where you like, Titmouse," replied Snap,
who, though young, was a thoroughly seasoned vessel, and could hold a
great deal of drink without seeming, or really being, much the worse for
it. As for Titmouse, happily for him! (seeing that he was so soon to
have the command of unlimited means, unless indeed the envious fates
should in the mean time interpose to dash the brimful cup from his eager
lips,) he was becoming more and more accustomed to the effects of drink;
which had, up to the moment I am speaking of, had no other effect than
to elevate his spirits up to the pitch of indefinite daring and
enterprise. "'Pon my life, Snap, couldn't we stand another tumbler--eh?
Warm us for the night air?" "What shall it be?" quoth Snap, ringing the
bell--"whiskey?"

"Devil knows, and devil cares!" replied Mr. Titmouse, recklessly; and
presently there stood before the friends two steaming tumblers of what
they had ordered. Immediately after disposing of them, the two
gentlemen, quite _up to the mark_, as they expressed it--each with a
cigar in his mouth--sallied forth in quest of adventures. Titmouse felt
that he had now become a gentleman; and his tastes and feelings prompted
him to pursue, as early as possible, a gentlemanly line of
conduct--particularly in his amusements. It was now past twelve; and the
narrow old-fashioned streets of York, silent and deserted, formed a
strong contrast to the streets of London at the same hour, and seemed
scarcely to admit of much sport. But sport our friends were determined
to have; and the night air aiding the effect of their miscellaneous
potations, they soon became somewhat excited and violent. Yet it seemed
difficult to get up a _row_--for no one was visible in any direction.
Snap, however, by way of making a beginning, suddenly shouted "Fire!" at
the top of his voice, and Titmouse joined him; when having heard half a
dozen windows hastily thrown up by the dismayed inhabitants whom the
alarming sounds had aroused from sleep, they scampered off at their top
speed. In another part of the town they yelled, and whistled, and crowed
like cocks, and mewed like cats--the last two being accomplishments in
which Titmouse was very eminent--and again took to their heels. Then
they contrived to twist a few knockers off doors, pull bells, and break
a few windows; and while exercising their skill in this last branch of
the night's amusement, Titmouse, in the very act of aiming a stone which
took effect in the middle of a bedroom window, was surprised by an old
watchman waddling round the corner. He was a feeble asthmatic old man;
so Snap knocked him down at once, and Titmouse blew out the candle in
his lantern, which he then jumped upon and smashed to pieces, and
knocked its prostrate owner's hat over his eyes. Snap, on some strange
unaccountable impulse, wrested the rattle out of the poor creature's
hand, and sprang it loudly. This brought several other old watchmen from
different quarters; and aged numbers prevailing against youthful
spirit--the two gentlemen, after a considerable scuffle, were
overpowered and conveyed to the cage. Snap having muttered something
about demanding to look at the _warrant_, and then about an action for
malicious arrest and false imprisonment, sank on a form, and then down
upon the floor, and fell fast asleep. Titmouse for a while showed a very
resolute front, and swore a great many oaths, that he would fight the
Boots at the inn for five shillings, if he dared show himself; but all
of a sudden, his spirit collapsed, as it were, and he sank on the floor,
and was grievously indisposed for some hours. About nine o'clock, the
contents of the cage--viz. Snap, Titmouse, two farmers' boys who had
been caught stealing cakes, an old beggar, and a young pickpocket--were
conveyed before the Lord Mayor to answer for their several misdeeds.
Snap was wofully crestfallen. He had sent for the landlord of the inn
where they had put up, to come, on their behalf, to the Mansion-house;
but he told Quirk of the message he had received. Mr. Quirk, finding
that Gammon could not leave his room through severe indisposition--the
very first time that Mr. Quirk had ever seen or heard of his being so
overtaken--set off, in a very mortified and angry mood, in quest of his
hopeful client and junior partner. They were in a truly dismal pickle.
Titmouse pale as death, his clothes disordered, and a part of his
shirt-collar torn off; Snap sat beside him with a sheepish air, seeming
scarce able to keep his eyes open. At him Mr. Quirk looked with keen
indignation, but spoke neither to him, nor on his behalf. For Titmouse,
however, he expressed great commiseration, and entreated his Lordship to
overlook the little misconduct of which he (Titmouse) in a moment of
extreme excitement, had been guilty, on condition of his making amends
for the injury, both to person and property, of which he had been
guilty. By this time his Lordship had become aware of the names and
circumstances of the two delinquents; and after lecturing them very
severely, he fined them five shillings a-piece for being drunk, and
permitted them to be discharged, on their promising never to offend in
the like way again, and paying three pounds by way of compensation to
the watchman, and one or two persons whose knockers they were proved to
have wrenched off, and windows to have broken. His Lordship had delayed
the case of Messrs. Snap and Titmouse to the last; chiefly because, as
soon as he had found out who Mr. Titmouse was, it occurred to him that
he would make a sort of a little star, at the great ball to be given by
the Lady Mayoress that evening. As soon, therefore, as the charge had
been disposed of, his Lordship desired Mr. Titmouse to follow him, for a
moment, to his private room. There having shut the door, he gently
chided Mr. Titmouse for the indiscretion of which he had been guilty,
and which was not to have been expected from a gentleman of his
consequence in the county. His Lordship begged him to consider the
station which he was now called to occupy; and in alluding to the signal
event of the preceding day, warmly congratulated him upon it; and,
trusted by the way, that Mr. Titmouse would, in the evening, favor the
Lady Mayoress and himself with his company at the ball, where they would
be very proud of the opportunity of introducing him to some of the
gentry of the county, among whom his future lot in life was likely to be
cast. Mr. Titmouse listened to all this as if he were in a dream. His
brain (the little of it that he had) was yet in a most unsettled state;
as also was his stomach. When he heard the words "Lady Mayoress,"
"ball," "Mansion-house," "gentry of the county," and so forth, a dim
vision of splendor flashed before his eyes; and, with a desperate
effort, he assured the Lord Mayor that he should be "very uncommon proud
to accept the invitation, if he were well enough--but, just then, he
was uncommon ill."

His Lordship pressed him to take a glass of water, to revive him and
settle his stomach; but Mr. Titmouse declined it, and soon afterwards
quitted the room; and leaning on the arm of Mr. Quirk, set off
homeward--Snap walking beside him in silence, with a very quaint
disconcerted air--not being taken the least notice of by Mr. Quirk. As
they passed along, they encountered several of the barristers on their
way to court, and others, who recognized Titmouse; and with a smile,
evidently formed a pretty accurate guess as to the manner in which the
triumph of the preceding day had been celebrated. Mr. Quirk, finding
that Mr. Gammon was far too much indisposed to think of quitting York,
at all events till a late hour in the evening, and, indeed, that
Titmouse was similarly situated--with a very bad grace consented to
their stopping behind; and himself, with Snap--the former inside, the
latter outside--having paid most of the witnesses, leaving the
remainder, together with their own expenses at the inn, to be settled by
Mr. Gammon--set off for town by the two o'clock coach. It was, indeed,
high time for them to return; for the oppressed inmates of Newgate were
getting wild on account of the protracted absence of their kind and
confidential advisers. When they left, both Gammon and Titmouse were in
bed. The former, however, began to revive, shortly after the wheels of
the coach which conveyed away his respected copartners, and the sound of
the guard's horn, had ceased to be heard; and about an hour afterwards
he descended from his room, a great deal the better for the duties of
the toilet, and a bottle of soda-water with a little brandy in it. A cup
of strong tea, and a slice or two of dry toast, set him entirely to
rights--and then Gammon--the calm, serene, astute Gammon--was "himself
again." Had he said anything indiscreet, or in any way committed
himself, over-night?--thought he, as he sat alone, with folded arms,
trying to recollect what had taken place. He hoped not--but had no means
of ascertaining. Then he entered upon a long and anxious consideration
of the position of affairs, since the great event of the preceding
evening. The only definite object which he had ever had in view,
personally, in entering into the affair, was the obtaining that
ascendency over Titmouse, in the event of his becoming possessed of the
magnificent fortune they were in quest of for him, which might enable
him, in one way or another, to elevate his own position in society, and
secure for himself permanent and solid advantages. In the progress of
the affair, however, new views presented themselves to his mind.

Towards the close of the afternoon Titmouse recovered sufficiently to
make his appearance down-stairs. Soon afterwards, Gammon proposed a
walk, as the day was fine, and the brisk fresh country air would be
efficacious in restoring Titmouse to his wonted health and spirits. His
suggestion was adopted; and soon afterwards might have been seen,
Gammon, supporting on his arm his languid and interesting client Mr.
Titmouse, making their way towards the river; along whose quiet and
pleasing banks they walked for nearly a couple of hours in close
conversation; during which, Gammon, by repeated and various efforts,
succeeded in producing an impression on Titmouse's mind, that the good
fortune which seemed now within his reach, had been secured for him by
the enterprise, skill, and caution of him, Mr. Gammon, only; who would,
moreover, continue to devote himself to Mr. Titmouse's interests, and
protect him from the designs of those who would endeavor to take
advantage of him. Mr. Gammon also dropped one or two vague hints that
his--Titmouse's--continuance in the enjoyment of the Yatton property,
would always depend upon the will and power of him, the aforesaid Mr.
Gammon; in whose hands were most unsuspected, but potent weapons. And
indeed it is not at all impossible that such may prove to be really the
case.

What a difference is there between man and man, in temper, and
disposition, and intellect! Compare together the two individuals now
walking slowly, arm-in-arm, beside the sweet Ouse; and supposing one to
have designs upon the other--disposed to ensnare and overreach him--what
chance has the shorter gentleman? Compare even their countenances--ah
me!--what a difference!

Gammon heard with uneasiness of Titmouse's intention to go to the Lady
Mayoress's ball that evening; and, for many reasons, resolved that he
should not. In vain, however, did Gammon try to persuade him that he was
asked only to be turned into ridicule, for that almost everybody there
would be in the interest of the Aubreys, and bitterly opposed to him,
Mr. Titmouse; in spite of these and all other representations, Titmouse
expressed his determination to go to the ball; on which Gammon, with a
good-natured smile, exclaimed, "Well, well!"--and withdrew his
opposition. Shortly after their return from their walk, they sat down to
dinner; and Gammon, with a cheerful air, ordered a bottle of champagne,
of which he drank about a glass and a half, and Titmouse the remainder.
That put him into a humor to take more wine, without much pressing; and
he swallowed, in rapid succession, a glass of ale, and seven or eight
glasses of red-hot port and fiery sherry. By this time, he had forgotten
all about the ball, and clamored for brandy and water. Gammon, however,
saw that his end was answered. Poor Titmouse was soon reduced to a state
of helplessness and insensibility; and within half an hour's time was
assisted to his bedroom in a truly deplorable condition! Thus Gammon had
the satisfaction of seeing his benevolent design accomplished, although
it pained him to think of the temporary inconvenience occasioned to the
unconscious sufferer; who had, however, escaped the devices of those who
wished publicly to expose his inexperience; and as for the means which
Gammon had resorted to in order to effect his purpose,--why, he may be
supposed to have had a remoter object in view, viz. early to disgust him
with intemperance.

Alas! how disappointed were the mayor and mayoress, that their queer
little lion did not make his appearance in the gay and brilliant scene!
How many had they told that he was coming! Their three daughters were
almost bursting with vexation and astonishment. They had been disposed
to entertain a warmer feeling than that of mere curiosity towards the
new owner of an estate worth ten thousand a-year--had drawn lots which
of them was first to dance with him; and had told all their friends on
which of them the lot had fallen. Then, again, many of the county people
inquired from time to time of the chagrined little mayor and mayoress
when "Mr. Ticklemouse," "Mr. Tipmouse," "Mr. Tipplebattle," or "whatever
his name might be," was coming; full of real curiosity, much tinctured,
however, with disgust and contempt, to see the stranger, who had
suddenly acquired so commanding a station in the county--so strong a
claim to their sympathy and respect! Then, again, there was a very great
lion there, exhibiting for a short time only, who also had wished to see
the _little_ lion, and expressed keen regrets that it was not there
according to appointment. The great lion was Mr. Quicksilver, who had
stepped in for about half an hour, merely to show himself; and when he
heard of the expected arrival of his little client, it occurred to Mr.
Quicksilver, who could see several inches beyond by no means a short
nose, that Mr. Titmouse had gained a verdict which would very soon make
him _patron of the_ _borough of Yatton_--that he probably would not
think of sitting for the borough himself, and that a little public
civility bestowed upon Mr. Titmouse, by the great Mr. Quicksilver, one
of the counsel to whose splendid exertions he was indebted for his all,
might be, as it were, _bread thrown upon the waters, to be found after
many days_. It was true that Mr. Quicksilver, in a bitter stream of
eloquent invective, had repeatedly denounced the system of close and
"rotten" boroughs; but his heart, all the while, secretly rebelled; and
he knew that a snug little borough was a thing on every account not to
be sneezed at. He sat for one himself, though he had also contested
several counties; but that was expensive and harassing work; and the
seat which he at present occupied, he had paid far too high a price for.
He had no objection to the existence of close boroughs in the abstract;
but only to so many of them being in the hands of the opposite party;
and the legislature hath since recognized the distinction, and acted
upon it. Here, however, was the case of a borough which was going to
change hands, and pass from Tory to Whig; and could Mr. Quicksilver fail
to watch it with interest? Was he, therefore, to neglect this
opportunity of slipping in for Yatton--and the _straw moving_, too, in
town--a general election looked for? So Mr. Quicksilver really regretted
the absence of the little lion--his little friend and client, Mr.
Titmouse.

Thus, and by such persons, and on such grounds, was lamented the absence
of Mr. Titmouse from the ball of the Lady Mayoress of York; none,
however, knowing the cause which kept him from so select and
distinguished an assembly. Mr. Gammon, as soon as he had seen Mr.
Titmouse properly attended to, and had expressed an anxious sympathy for
him, set out for a walk--a quiet solitary walk round the ancient walls
of York. If on a fine night you look up into the sky, and see it
gleaming with innumerable stars, and then fix your eye intently,
_without wavering_, upon some one star; however vivid and brilliant may
be those in its immediate vicinity, they will disappear utterly, and
that on which your eye is fixed will seem alone in its glory--sole star
in the firmament. Something of this kind happened to Mr. Gammon when on
the walls of York--now slowly, then rapidly walking, now standing, then
sitting; all the objects which generally occupied his thoughts faded
away, before one on which his mind's eye was then fixed with unwavering
intensity--the image of Miss Aubrey. The golden fruit that was on the
eve of dropping into the hands of the firm--ten thousand pounds--the
indefinite and varied advantages to himself, personally, to which their
recent successes might be turned, all vanished. What would he not
undergo, what would he not sacrifice, to secure the favor of Miss
Aubrey? Beautiful being--all innocence, elegance, refinement:--to
possess her would elevate him in the scale of being; it would purify his
feelings, it would ennoble his nature. What was too arduous or desperate
to be undertaken in order to secure a prize so glorious as this? He fell
into a long revery, till, roused by a chill gust of night air, he rose
from his seat upon one of the niches in the walls;--how lonely, how
solitary he felt! He walked on rapidly, at a pace that suited the heated
and rapid current of thoughts that passed through his mind.

"No, I have not a chance--not a chance!" at length he thought to
himself--"That girl will be prouder in her poverty, than ever she would
have been in her wealth and splendor. Who am I?--a partner in the firm
of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; a firm in bad odor with the profession;
looking for practice from polluted sources, with a host of miscreants
for clients--faugh! faugh! I feel contaminated and degraded! My name
even is against me; it is growing into a by-word!--We must push our
advantage--they must be driven from Yatton--he, she--all of them; yes,
all." He paused for a long time, and a sort of pang passed through his
mind. "They are to make way for--Titmouse!--for Titmouse!! And he, too,
loves her--_bah!_" He involuntarily uttered this sound fiercely, and
aloud. "But stay--he really is in love with Miss Aubrey--that I
know;--ah! I can turn it to good purpose; it will give me, by the way, a
hold upon the little fool; I will make him believe that through my means
he may obtain Miss Aubrey! Misery may make her accessible; I can easily
bring myself into contact with them, in their distress; for there are
the mesne profits--_the mesne profits!_ Heavens! how glorious, but how
dreadful an engine are _they_! They will help to batter down the high
wall of pride that surrounds _them_ and _her_; but it will require
infinite care and tact in the use of such an engine! I will be all
delicacy--gentleness--generosity; I will appear friendly to her, and to
her brother; and, if needs must be, why he must be _crushed_. There is
no help for it. He looks decidedly, by the way--a man of intellect. I
wonder how he bears it--how they all bear it--how _she_ bears it!
_Beggared beauty_--there's something touching in the very sound! How
little they think of the power that is at this moment in my hands!" Here
a long interval elapsed, during which his thoughts had wandered towards
more practical matters. "If they don't get a rule _nisi_, next term, we
shall be in a position to ask them what course they intend to pursue:
Gad, they may, if so disposed, hold out for--how very cold it is!"--he
buttoned his coat--"and, what have I been thinking of? Really I have
been dreaming; or am I as great a fool as Tittlebat?" Within a few
minutes' time he had quitted the walls, and descended through one of the
turreted gateways, into the town.




CHAPTER II.


When, about seven o'clock on the morning after the delivery of the
verdict, which, if sustained, consigned the Aubreys to beggary, they met
to partake of a slight and hasty breakfast before setting off for
Yatton, the countenances of each bore the traces of great suffering, and
also of the efforts made to conceal it. They saluted each other with
fervent affection, each attempting a smile--but a smile, how wan and
forced! "The moment has arrived, dear Agnes and Kate," said Mr. Aubrey,
with a fond air but a firm voice, as his sister was preparing tea, in
silence, fearful of looking at either her brother or sister-in-law; "the
moment has arrived that is to try what stuff we are made of. If we have
any strength, this is the time to show it!"

"I'm sure I thought of you both almost all night long!" replied Miss
Aubrey, tremulously. "You have a lion's heart, dear Charles; and yet you
are so gentle with us"----

"I should be a poor creature indeed, Kate, to give way just when I ought
to play the man. Come, dear Kate, I will remind you of a noble passage
from our glorious Shakespeare. It braces one's nerves to hear it!" Then,
with a fine impressive delivery, and kindling with excitement as he went
on, Aubrey began--

                  "In the reproof of chance
    Lies the true proof of men. The sea being smooth
    How many shallow bauble boats dare sail
    Upon her patient breast, making their way
    With those of nobler bulk?
    But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
    The gentle Thetis, and, anon, behold
    The strong-ribb'd bark through liquid mountains cut,
    Bounding between the two moist elements
    Like Perseus' horse; where's then the saucy boat,
    Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now
    Co-rivall'd greatness? Either to harbor fled,
    Or made a toast for Neptune!--Even so,
    Doth valor's show, and valor's worth divide,
    In storms of fortune."[3]

'Twas kindly meant of Aubrey; he thought to divert the excited feelings
of his wife and sister, and occupy their imagination with the vivid
imagery and noble sentiment of the poet. While he repeated the above
lines, his sister's eye had been fixed upon him with a radiant
expression of resolution, her heart responding to what she heard. She
could not, however, speak when he had ceased. For herself she cared not;
but when she looked at her brother, and thought of him, his wife, his
children, her fortitude yielded before the moving array, and she burst
into tears.

"Come, Kate--my own sweet, good Kate!" said he, cheerfully, laying his
hand upon hers, "we must keep constant guard against our _feelings_.
They will be ever arraying before our eyes the past--the dear,
delightful past--happy and beautiful, in mournful contrast with the
present, and stirring up, every moment, a thousand secret and tender
associations, calculated to shake our constancy. Whenever our eyes _do_
turn to the past, let it be with humble gratitude to God for having
allowed us all, in this changing world, so long an interval of
happiness; such, indeed, as falls to the lot of few. _What! shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?_"

"My own Charles!" exclaimed Mrs. Aubrey, rising and throwing her arms
round her husband, whose countenance was calm and serene, as was the
tone of the sentiments he expressed solemn and elevated. Miss Aubrey was
overcome with her stronger feelings, and buried her face in her
handkerchief. Shortly afterwards the carriage drew up, and Dr. Tatham
also made his appearance on horseback.

"Good-morning! good-morning, my friends," cried he, cheerfully, as he
entered, holding forth both his hands; "you can't think how fresh and
pleasant the air is! The country for me, at all times of the year! I
hate towns! Did you sleep well? I slept like a top all night long;--no,
I didn't either, by the way. Come, come, ladies! On with your bonnets
and shawls!" Thus rattled on worthy little Dr. Tatham, in order to
prevent anything being said which might disturb those whom he came to
see, or cause his own highly-charged feelings to give way. The sight of
Mrs. and Miss Aubrey, however, who greeted him in silence as they
hastily drew on their bonnets and shawls, overcame his ill-sustained
gayety; and before he could bustle back, as he presently did, to the
street door, his eyes were obstructed with tears, and he wrung the hand
of Mr. Aubrey, who stood beside him, with convulsive energy. They soon
set off, and at a rapid pace, Dr. Tatham riding along beside the
carriage. Yatton was about twelve miles off. For the first few miles
they preserved a tolerable show of cheerfulness; but as they perceived
themselves nearing Yatton, it became plainly more and more of an effort
for any of them to speak. Dr. Tatham, also, talked to them seldomer
through the windows. At one time he dropped considerably behind; at
another, he rode as much ahead.

"Oh, Charles, don't you dread to see Yatton?" said Miss Aubrey,
suddenly, as they turned a familiar corner of the road. Neither Mr. nor
Mrs. Aubrey answered her.

"When you come to the village," said Mr. Aubrey presently, to the
postilion, "drive through it, right up to the Hall, as quickly as you
can." He was obeyed. As they passed rapidly along with their windows up,
none of the wretched party seemed disposed to look through, but leaned
back, in silence, in their seats.

"God bless you! God bless you! I shall call in the evening," exclaimed
Dr. Tatham; as, having reached the vicarage, he hastily waved his hand,
and turned off. Soon they had passed the park gates; when had they
entered it before with such heavy hearts--with eyes so dreading to
encounter every familiar object that met them? Alas! the spacious park
was no longer theirs; not a tree, not a shrub, not a flower, not an inch
of ground; the trees all putting forth their fresh green leaves--nothing
was theirs; the fine old turreted gateway, too--an object always,
hitherto, of peculiar pride and attachment, their hearts seemed to
tremble as they rattled under it!

"Courage, my sweet loves! Courage! courage!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey,
grasping each of their hands, and then they burst into tears. Mr. Aubrey
felt his own fortitude grievously shaken as he entered the old Hall, no
longer his _home_, and reflected, moreover--bitterest thought of
all--that he had been declared by the law to have been hitherto the
wrongful occupant of it; that he must forthwith proceed to "set his
house in order," and prepare for a dreadful reckoning with him whom the
law had declared to be the true owner of Yatton.

The formal result of the trial at York, was, as has been already
intimated, to declare Mr. Titmouse entitled to recover possession of
only that insignificant portion of the estates which were occupied by
Jacob Jolter; and that, too, only in the event of the first four days of
the ensuing term elapsing, without any successful attempt being made to
impeach, before the court, the propriety of the verdict of the jury. It
is a principle of our English law, that the verdict of a jury is, in
general, irreversible and conclusive; but, inasmuch as that verdict may
have been improperly obtained--as, for instance, either through the
misdirection of the judge, or his erroneous admission or rejection of
evidence; or may have no force in point of law by reason of the
pleadings of the party for whom it has been given, being insufficient to
warrant the court to award its final judgment upon, and in conformity
with, such verdict, or by reason of the discovery of fresh evidence
subsequently to the trial: therefore the law hath given the party who
failed at the trial, till the end of the first four days of the term
next ensuing, to show the court why the verdict obtained by his opponent
ought to go for nothing, and matters remain as they were before the
trial, or a new trial be had. So anxious is our law to afford the utmost
scope and opportunity for ascertaining what ought to be its decision,
which, when obtained, is, as hath been said, solemnly and permanently
conclusive upon the subject; such the effectual and practical corrective
of any error or miscarriage in the working of that noble engine--trial
by jury. Thus, then, it appears, that the hands of Mr. Titmouse and his
advisers were at all events stayed till the first four days of Easter
term should have elapsed. During the interval thus afforded to the
advisers of Mr. Aubrey, his case, as it appeared upon the notes of his
counsel on their briefs, with the indirect assistance and corroboration
derived from the short-hand writers' notes, underwent repeated and most
anxious examination in all its parts and bearings, by all his legal
advisers. It need hardly be said, that every point in the case favorable
to their client had been distinctly and fully raised by the
Attorney-General, assisted by his very able juniors, Mr. Sterling and
Mr. Crystal; and so was it with the counsel of Mr. Titmouse, as, indeed,
the result showed. On subsequent examination, none of them could
discover any false step, or any advantage which had been overlooked, or
taken inefficiently. Independently of various astute objections taken by
the Attorney-General to the reception of several important portions of
the plaintiff's evidence, the leading points relied on in favor of Mr.
Aubrey were--the impropriety of Lord Widdrington's rejection of the deed
of confirmation on account of the erasure in it; the effect of that
deed, assuming the erasure not to have warranted its rejection; and
several questions arising out of the doctrine of adverse possession, by
which alone, it had been contended at the trial, that the claim of the
descendants of Stephen Dreddlington had been peremptorily and finally
barred. Two very long consultations had been held at the
Attorney-General's chambers, attended by Mr. Sterling, Mr. Crystal, Mr.
Mansfield, the three partners in the firm of Runnington and Company, Mr.
Parkinson, and Mr. Aubrey--who had come up to town specially for the
purpose. Greatly to the surprise of all of them, he stated most
distinctly and emphatically, that he insisted on no ground of objection
being taken against his opponent, except such as was strictly just,
equitable, honorable, and conscientious. Rather than defeat him on mere
technicalities--rather than avail himself of mere positive rules of law,
while the RIGHT, as between the consciences of man and man, was
substantially in favor of his opponent--Mr. Aubrey declared, however
absurd or Quixotic he might be thought, that he would--if he had
them--lose fifty Yattons. _Fiat justitia, ruat cœlum._ "You mean to
say, Aubrey," interrupted the Attorney-General, mildly, after listening
for some time to his friend and client with evident interest, and
admiration of his pure and high-minded character--"that it would be
unconscientious of you to avail yourself of a fixed and beneficial rule
of law, established upon considerations of general equity and
utility--such, for instance, as that of adverse possession in order to
retain possession, while"----

"Pray, Mr. Attorney-General, if I had lent you five hundred pounds seven
or eight years ago, would you set up the _statute of limitations_
against me when I asked for re-payment?"

"Excuse me, Aubrey," replied the Attorney-General, with a faint flush
upon his handsome and dignified features; "but how idle all this is! One
would imagine that we were sitting in a school of casuistry! What are we
met for, in the name of common sense? For what, but to prevent the
rightful owner of property from being deprived of it by a trumpery
accidental erasure in one of his title-deeds, which time has deprived
him of the means of accounting for?" He then, in a very kind way, but
with a dash of peremptoriness, requested that the case might be left in
their hands, and that they might be given credit for resorting to
nothing that was inconsistent with the nicest and most fastidious sense
of honor. This observation put an end to so unprecedented an
interference; but if Mr. Aubrey supposed that it had had any effect upon
the Attorney-General, he was mistaken; for of course that learned and
eminent person secretly resolved to avail himself of every means that he
could think of, for overturning the verdict, and securing the Aubreys in
the possession of Yatton. He at the same time earnestly endeavored to
moderate the expectations of his client, declaring that he was by no
means sanguine as to the issue; that Lord Widdrington's rulings at _Nisi
Prius_ were very formidable things--in fact, rarely assailable; and
then, again, the senior puisne judge of the court--Mr. Justice
Grayley--had been consulted by Lord Widdrington at the trial, and
concurred with him in his principal ruling, now sought to be moved
against. At the close of the second consultation, on the night of the
first day in Easter term, (the Attorney-General intending to move on
the ensuing morning,) after having finally gone over the case in all its
bearings, and agreed upon the exact grounds of moving--the
Attorney-General called back Mr. Runnington for a moment, as he was
walking away with Mr. Aubrey, and whispered to him, that it would be
very proper to assume at once that the motion failed; and consider the
best mode of negotiating concerning the surrender of the bulk of the
property, and the payment of the mesne profits.

"Oh! Mr. Aubrey has quite made up his mind to the worst, Mr.
Attorney-General."

"Ah, well!" replied the Attorney-General, with a sigh; and about five
minutes after Mr. Runnington's departure, the Attorney-General stepped
into his carriage, which had been standing for the last hour opposite
his chambers. He drove down to the House of Commons, where he almost
immediately after delivered a long and luminous speech on one of the
most important and intricate questions that had been discussed during
the session!

At length arrived the morning of the second day in term. Lord
Widdrington was occupied for about a couple of hours in "going through
the bar"--_i. e._ calling on counsel to "move" in their order matters of
general business, before taking motions for new trials. About a quarter
of an hour before his Lordship had completed the round of the bar, the
Attorney-General came into court, and arranged all his books and papers
before him; Mr. Subtle sitting next to him, intending to take a note of
the grounds on which he moved.

"Does any other gentleman move?" inquired Lord Widdrington, looking over
the court. He received no answer.

"Mr. Attorney-General," said he; and the Attorney-General rose----

"If your Lordship pleases," he commenced, slowly rising and bowing--"in
a case of DOE on the Demise of TITMOUSE against JOLTER, tried before
your Lordship at the last assizes for the county of York, I have humbly
to move your Lordship for _a rule to show cause why a nonsuit should
not be entered, or why the verdict entered for the plaintiff should not
be set aside, and a New Trial had_." He proceeded to state the facts of
the case with great clearness and brevity. In like manner--with perfect
simplicity and precision--he stated the various points arising upon the
evidence, and the general grounds of law which have been already
specified; but I am so grateful to the reader for his patience under the
infliction of so much legal detail as was contained in the last chapter
of this history, that I shall now content myself with the above general
statement of what took place before the court. As soon as he had sat
down, the judges consulted together for a minute or two; and then--

"You may take a rule to show cause, Mr. Attorney-General," said Lord
Widdrington.

"On all the grounds I have mentioned, my Lord?"

"Yes--on all of them. They are very well worth considering--Mr.
Solicitor-General, do you move?"

Up rose, thereupon, the Solicitor-General.

"I shall discharge your rule," whispered Mr. Subtle to the
Attorney-General.

"I'm not excessively sanguine,"--whispered the Attorney-General, leaning
his head close to Mr. Subtle, and with his hand before his mouth. Then
his clerk removed the battery of books which stood before him, together
with his brief; and taking another out of his turgid red bag, the
Attorney-General was soon deep in the details of an important shipping
case, in which he was going to move when next it came to his turn.

Thus the court had granted a "RULE NISI," as it is called, (_i. e._ it
commanded a particular thing to be done--"_unless_" sufficient
"_cause_" could be thereafter shown to the court why it should not be
done,) for either entering a nonsuit, or having a new trial. Now, had
this rule been obtained in the present day, nearly two years must have
elapsed, owing to the immense and perhaps unavoidable arrear of
business, before the other side could have been heard in answer to it.
Now, had such been the state of business at the time when the Rule in
_Doe_ d. _Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_ was moved for, see the practical effect
of it: had Mr. Aubrey, instead of the high-minded and conscientious man
he undoubtedly was, been a rogue, he might have had the opportunity of
getting in nearly twenty thousand pounds, and setting off with it to
spend upon the Continent, as soon as he found that the court had decided
against him: or, if the tenants should have been served with notice not
to pay their rents to any one but Mr. Titmouse--at all events not to Mr.
Aubrey--how were Mr. Aubrey and his family to have subsisted during this
interval?--and with the possibility that, at the end of some two years,
he might be declared to be the true owner of Yatton, and consequently
all the while entitled to those rents, &c., the non-payment of which
might have entailed upon him the most serious embarrassments! During the
same interval, poor Mr. Titmouse, heart-sick with hope deferred, might
have taken to liquor, as a solace under his misery, and drunk himself to
death before the rule was discharged--or brought his valuable life to a
more sudden and abrupt conclusion: which affecting event would have
relieved the court from deciding several troublesome points of law, and
kept the Aubreys in possession of the Yatton estates. Thus much for some
of the incidental effects of the law's delay! At the time, however,
concerning which I am writing, it was otherwise.[4] Shall I be believed
when I inform the reader that within ten or twelve days after the rule
_nisi_, in the present case, had been moved, "cause was shown" against
it, by Mr. Subtle and Mr. Lynx, and very admirably shown against it too.
(Mr. Quicksilver, fortunately for the interests of Mr. Titmouse, was
absent, attending a great meeting in the City, called by himself to
establish a society for the Moral and Intellectual Regeneration of
Mankind on the basis of Pure Reason.) The Attorney-General exerted
himself to the utmost in support of his rule. He felt that the
court--though scarcely at all interfering during his address--was
against him; yet he delivered, perhaps, one of the most masterly
arguments that had ever been heard in the place where he was speaking.
Mr. Sterling and Mr. Crystal, wisely avoiding the ground so admirably
occupied by the Attorney-General, contented themselves with
strengthening those positions which appeared to them less fortified by
authorities than the others; and then the court said they would take a
day or two's time to consider; "less on account," said Lord Widdrington,
"of the difficulty of the case, than the magnitude of the interests
which would probably be affected by their decision."

"You have them dead with you, Subtle," whispered the Attorney-General, a
slight expression of chagrin stealing over his features, as he heard the
observation of Lord Widdrington.

"I never doubted it," replied Mr. Subtle, with a confident air. Every
day afterwards, from the sitting to the rising of the court, did the
anxious Aubrey attend in the King's Bench, to hear the judgment of the
court delivered. At length arrived the last day of the term. Soon after
the sitting of the court, Lord Widdrington pronounced judgment in two or
three cases; but not seeing the Attorney-General (who was engaged before
the House of Lords) in his place, delayed giving judgment in the case of
"_Doe_ v. _Jolter_." About two o'clock he made his appearance; and
shortly afterwards, Lord Widdrington, after disposing of the matter then
before the court, said--"There was a case of Doe on the demise of
Titmouse against Jolter, in which, early in the term, a rule was
obtained by the Attorney-General, calling upon the lessor of the
plaintiff to show cause why"--and he proceeded to state the rule, and
then to deliver the written unanimous judgment of the court. A clear
statement of the facts out of which the questions submitted to the court
had arisen, and of those questions themselves, was listened to by Mr.
Aubrey in breathless suspense, before he could obtain the faintest
intimation of the judgment which the court was about to pronounce. Lord
Widdrington went on to dispose, one by one, with painful deliberation
and precision, of the several points presented for the decision of the
court. One or two were decided in favor of the defendant; but his
Lordship added, that it had become unnecessary to do so, in consequence
of the answers given by the witnesses to subsequent questions at the
trial, and which disposed of the doubts arising on the former ones. The
documentary evidence, subsequently put in, got rid of another difficulty
in the early part of the plaintiff's case, and rendered immaterial a
question put by the plaintiff's counsel, and strenuously objected to on
the part of the defendant, and which the court was of opinion, as had
been Lord Widdrington at the trial, ought not to have been allowed.
Then, as to the ADVERSE POSSESSION, on which very great stress had been
laid by the defendant's counsel, the court was of opinion that none
existed; since there had been a _disability_--indeed, a series of
disabilities,[5]--through infancy, coverture, and absence beyond seas,
of the various parties through whom the lessor of the plaintiff claimed.
Finally, as to the question concerning the ERASURE, the court was of
opinion, that the deed in which it occurred had been properly rejected;
inasmuch as the erasure was in a clearly material part of the deed, and
there were no recitals in the deed by which it could be helped. That it
was incumbent upon those proffering the deed in evidence, to account for
its altered appearance, although the deed was more than thirty years
old, and rebut the presumption of fraud arising therefrom. That the
erasure was a clear badge of fraud; and to hold otherwise, would be to
open a wide door to frauds of the most extensive and serious
description. That there had been no evidence offered to show that the
deed had ever been a valid deed; the very first step failed; and, in
short, in its then state, it was in contemplation of law _no deed at
all_; and, consequently, had been properly rejected. "For all these
reasons, therefore," concluded Lord Widdrington, "we are clearly of
opinion, that the verdict ought not to be disturbed, and the rule will
consequently be DISCHARGED."[6] As these last words were pronounced, a
mist seemed for a moment to intervene between Mr. Aubrey and everything
around him; for his thoughts had reverted to Yatton, and the precious
objects of his affection who were there, in sickening suspense, awaiting
the event which had that moment taken place. The words yet sounding in
his excited ears, seemed like the sentence of expulsion from Paradise
passed upon our dismayed and heart-broken first parents. Yes, in that
solemn region of matter-of-fact and common-place--that _dead
sea_--generally speaking--as far as feeling, sentiment, incident, or
excitement is concerned, the Court of King's Bench--there sat a man of
exquisite sensibility--pure and high-minded--whose feelings were for a
while paralyzed by the words which had fallen from the judgment-seat,
uttered with a cold, business-like, indifferent air--oh! how horridly
out of concert with the anxious and excited tone of him whom, with his
lovely family, they consigned, in fact, to destitution! After remaining
for about a quarter of an hour, during which brief interval he resumed
the control over his feelings which he had so long and successfully
struggled to maintain, he rose, and quitted the court. It was a heavy
lowering afternoon--one which seemed to harmonize with the gloomy and
desolate mood in which he slowly walked homeward. He encountered many of
his friends, on foot, on horseback, and in carriages, on their way down
to the Houses of Parliament; the very sight of them, in the morbid state
of his feelings, gave him a pang that was indescribable. With _them_
matters were the same as they had ever been--as they had till then been
with him--and as probably they would be with them to the end of their
career; but _he_ had been forced, suddenly and forever, to quit the
scene of high excitement and proud aspirations!--He heaved many deep
sighs, as he exchanged nod after nod with those he met, as he approached
Charing Cross. There he encountered Lord C----, the brilliant Foreign
Secretary, arm-in-arm with two eloquent and leading members of the
Government--all of them evidently in high spirits, on their way down to
the House.

"Ah!--Aubrey!--In town?--An age since we met!"--exclaimed they, in a
breath, shaking him cordially by the hand.--"You know, of course, that
the budget comes on to-night--eh?"----

"I was not aware of it,"--said Mr. Aubrey.

"I assure you," interrupted Lord C----, "our friends will do us great
service--very essential service, by being early in their
attendance!--You know that Mr. Quicksilver intends to come out against
us to-night in great force?--My dear Aubrey, you are going the wrong
way!"

"I am not going down to the House to-night!"

"Not going down?--Eh?--My dear Aubrey, you astonish me!--Have you
paired off? You can't think how I lament your absence!"

"I am returning to Yorkshire almost immediately."

"But surely you can come for an hour, or so, to-night--eh? Come! The
division won't come on till late. Don't let a trifle stand in the way!"

"I would _not_ let a trifle stand in the way," replied Mr. Aubrey, in a
tone and manner which at once arrested the attention of those whom he
was addressing, and suddenly reminded them of what, in their political
eagerness, they had for a moment lost sight of--namely, the perilous
position of his private affairs.

"My dear Aubrey, I beg a thousand pardons for intruding such matters
upon you," said Lord C----, with sudden earnestness; "but shall we have
an opportunity of meeting before you leave town?"

"I fear--_not_;--I set off by the mail to-morrow evening--and have in
the mean time much to attend to," said Mr. Aubrey, unable to repress a
sigh--and they parted. But for a determination not to yield to a morbid
sensibility, he would have got into a hackney-coach, and so have avoided
the "troops of friends," the hosts of "old familiar faces," all wending
down to the scene in which he had begun so eminently to distinguish
himself--but from which he seemed now to be forever excluded. He,
therefore, pursued his way on foot. One of those on whom his troubled
eye lit, was a well-known figure on horseback--the great Duke of ----,
on his way down to the House of Lords, going very slowly, his head
inclined on one side, his iron-cast features overspread with an
expression of stern thoughtfulness. He did not observe Mr. Aubrey--in
fact, he seemed too much absorbed with his own thoughts to observe or
recognize anybody; yet he now and then mechanically raised his finger to
his hat, in acknowledgment of the obeisances of those who saluted him
as he passed. Poor Aubrey sighed; and felt as if circumstances had
placed him at an immeasurable distance from the man whom, so lately, he
had entertained familiarly at dinner; that there seemed suddenly to
exist, as it were, a great and impassable gulf between them.

On reaching his house in Grosvenor Street, his heart fluttered while he
knocked and rang; and he seemed to himself to shrink from the accustomed
obsequious voice and manner of the powdered menial who admitted him.
Having ordered a slight dinner, he repaired to his library. The only
letter which had arrived since he had left in the morning, bore the
Grilston postmark, and was in the handwriting of Mrs. Aubrey. He opened
it with trembling eagerness. It was crossed--the dear familiar
handwriting!--from beginning to end, and full of heart-subduing
tenderness. Then it had a little enclosure, with a strange, straggling
superscription, "To my Papa;" and, on opening it, he read, in similar
characters--

     "My dear Papa, I love you very very much. Do come home. Mamma sends
     her love. Your dutiful son,

                                                        "CHARLES AUBREY.

     "P. S.--Agnes sends her love; she cannot write because she is so
     little. Please to come home directly.

                                                  "CHARLES A., YATTON."

Aubrey saw how it was--that Mrs. Aubrey had either affected to write in
her little son's name, or had actually guided his pen. On the outside
she had written in pencil--

     "Charles says, he hopes that you will answer his letter directly."

Aubrey's lip quivered, and his eyes filled with tears. Putting the
letters into his bosom, he rose and walked to and fro, with feelings
which cannot be described. The evening was very gloomy. Rain poured
down incessantly. He was the only person in that spacious and elegant
house, except the servants left in charge of it; and dreary and desolate
enough it appeared. He was but its nominal owner--their nominal master!
In order to save the post, he sat down to write home--(_home_! his heart
sank within him at the thought)--and informed Mrs. Aubrey and his sister
of the event for which his previous letters had prepared them; adding
that he should set off for Yatton by the mail of the ensuing night, and
that he was perfectly well. He also wrote a line or two, in large
printed characters, by way of answer to his little correspondent, his
son, towards whom--ah!--how his heart yearned! and having despatched his
packet, probably the last he should ever frank, he partook of a hasty
and slight dinner, and then resigned himself to deep meditation upon his
critical circumstances. He was perfectly aware of his precise position,
in point of law, namely, that he was safe in the possession of the
Yatton property, (with the exception of the trifle which was occupied by
Jolter, and had been the object of the action just determined,) till
another action should have been brought, directly seeking its recovery;
and that by forcing his opponent to bring such action, he might put him
to considerable risk of retaining his verdict, and thereby greatly
harass him, and ward off, indefinitely, the evil day from himself. By
these means he might secure time, possibly also, favorable terms for the
payment of the dreadful arrear of mesne profits, in which he stood
indebted to his successor. To this effect he had received several
intimations from Mr. Runnington, as upright and conscientious an adviser
as was to be found in the profession. But Mr. Aubrey had decided upon
his course; he had taken his ground, and intended to maintain it.
However sudden and unlooked-for had been the claim set up against him,
it had been deliberately and solemnly confirmed by the law of the land;
and he had no idea but of yielding to it a prompt and hearty obedience.
He resolved, therefore, to waste no time--to fritter away no energy in
feeble dalliance with trouble; but to face her boldly. He determined to
instruct Mr. Runnington, on the morrow, to write to his opponent's
solicitors, informing them that within three weeks' time, the estates at
Yatton would be delivered up to their client, Mr. Titmouse, and also to
arrange for the quickest possible disposal of his house in Grosvenor
Street, and his wines and his furniture, both there and at Yatton. He
resolved, moreover, to take forthwith the necessary steps for vacating
his seat in Parliament, by applying for the Stewardship of the Chiltern
Hundreds; and having determined on these arrangements, consequent upon
the adverse decision of the Court of King's Bench of that day, he
experienced the momentary relief and satisfaction of the seaman who has
completely prepared his vessel for the approaching storm. He felt,
indeed, relieved, for a while, from a dreadful pressure.

"And what, now, have I really to complain of?" said he to himself; "why
murmur presumptuously and vainly against the dispensations of
Providence? I thank God that I am still able to recognize His hand in
what has befallen me, and to believe that _He hath done all things
well_; that prosperity and adversity are equally, from Him, means of
accomplishing _His_ all-wise purposes! Is it for _me_, poor insect! to
question the goodness, the wisdom, or the justice of my Maker? I thank
God for the firm belief I have, that _He governs the world in
righteousness_, and that He has declared that He will protect and bless
those who sincerely endeavor to discover, and conform to His will
concerning them. He it was who placed me in my late condition of
prosperity and eminence; why should I fret, when He sees fit gently to
remove me from it, and place me in a different sphere of exertion and
suffering? If the dark heathen could spend a life in endeavoring to
steel his heart against the sense of suffering, and to look with
cheerless indifference upon the vicissitudes of life, shall I, a
Christian, shrink with impatience and terror from the first glimpse of
adversity? Even at the worst, how favored is my situation in comparison
of that of millions of my fellow-creatures? Shall I--may I not--lessen
my own sufferings, by the contemplation of those which the Almighty has
thought fit to inflict upon my brethren? What if I, and those whom I
love, were the subjects of direful disease--of vice--of dishonor? What
if I were the object of the just and universal contempt of mankind;
given up to a reprobate mind; miserable here, and without hope
hereafter? Here have I health, a loving family--have had the inestimable
advantages of education, and even now, in the imminent approach of
danger, am enabled to preserve, in some measure, a composure of feeling,
a resolution--which will support me, and those who are dearer to me than
life." Here his heart beat quickly, and he walked rapidly to and fro. "I
am confident that Providence will care for them! As for me, even in
sight of the more serious and startling peril which menaces me--what is
it to a Christian but a trial of his constancy? _There hath no
temptation taken you_, say the Scriptures written for our instruction,
_but such as is common to man_;[7] _but God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but will with the
temptation, also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it_."
This consolatory passage led Aubrey, in a calm and exalted mood of mind,
to meditate upon that picture of submission to manifold misfortune,
simple and sublime beyond all comparison or approach, drawn by the
pencil of one inspired with wisdom from on high--calculated at once to
solemnize, to strengthen, and elevate the heart and character of man;
and which is to be found in the first and second chapters of the _Book
of Job_. Oh reader! who, brilliant as may be at this moment your
position in life, may have been heretofore, or may be hereafter, placed
in circumstances of dreadful suffering and peril, suffer him whose
humble labors now for a moment occupy your attention, reverently to
refer you again and yet again, to that memorable passage of holy writ!
With danger surrounding him, with utter ruin staring him in the face,
Mr. Aubrey read this passage of Scripture; his shaken spirit gathered
from it calmness and consolation; and after a while, retiring early to
bed, he enjoyed a night of tranquil repose.

"These wretches are determined not to let the grass grow underneath
their feet, Mr. Aubrey," said Mr. Runnington, who, the next morning,
made his appearance at breakfast, pursuant to appointment; "within two
hours' time of the court's delivering judgment, yesterday afternoon, I
received the following communication." He handed to Mr. Aubrey this
letter:--

                                      "_Saffron Hill, 25th April 18--._

     "GENTLEMEN:

                    "_Doe_ d. _Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_.

     "The rule for a new trial herein having been this day discharged,
     and the unanimous judgment of the court delivered in favor of the
     claims to the Yatton estate, of the lessor of the plaintiff, in the
     present action, we shall feel obliged by an intimation from you, at
     your earliest possible convenience, of the course which your client
     may think fit to adopt. You are, of course, aware that we are now
     in a situation to attack, successfully, the entire property at
     Yatton, at present in the possession of Mr. Aubrey; and that, had
     we thought fit, we might have sought and recovered it all in the
     action which has just been decided in favor of our client. It is
     now in our power greatly to _strengthen_ the evidence adduced at
     the late trial: and we beg to be informed whether it is your
     client's intention to put Mr. Titmouse to the enormous expense,
     and delay, of a second trial, the issue of which cannot be doubtful;
     or, with the promptitude and candor which are to be expected from
     a gentleman of the station and character of your client, at once
     to yield to our client the substantial fruits of his verdict.

     "If his reasonable wishes and expectations in this matter should be
     disregarded and frustrated, we would merely intimate that it will be
     for your client most seriously to weigh the consequences; to see
     whether such a line of conduct may not greatly prejudice his
     interests, and place him in a far worse position than, perhaps, he
     would otherwise have occupied. As we understand your client to be in
     town, we trust you will forgive us for requesting you immediately to
     communicate with him; and that at your earliest convenience you will
     enable us to announce the result to our client.--We are, gentlemen,
     your obedient servants,

                                                 "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP.

       "MESSRS. RUNNINGTON & CO."

"Well--I own I see nothing to find fault with," said Mr. Aubrey, calmly,
but with a suppressed sigh, as soon as he had read the letter.

"Rather quick work, too--is it not, Mr. Aubrey?--within an hour or two
after judgment pronounced in their favor:--but, to be sure, it's very
excusable, when you consider the line of business and the sort of
clients that Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap are accustomed to."

"I have made up my mind as to the course I shall adopt," said Mr.
Aubrey.

"Oh, of course, that is quite clear!" said Mr. Runnington, pouring out
his coffee--"we shall stand another shot, and see if they've ammunition
enough left for the purpose: and we'll tender a bill of exceptions, and
carry the case into the Exchequer Chamber, and thence into the House of
Lords--ah! we'll _work_ them, I warrant them!"--and he rubbed his hands,
with a little excitement in his manner.

"Why, Mr. Runnington," answered Mr. Aubrey, gravely, "would it not be
wanton--most unconscientious--in me to put them to the expense and
anxiety of a second trial, when the whole case, on both sides, has been
fairly brought before both the court and the jury?"

"Good heavens, Mr. Aubrey!" exclaimed Mr. Runnington, with visible
amazement--"who ever heard of an estate of even one or two hundred
a-year being surrendered after one assault?"

"If it were ten thousand times ten thousand a-year, I would
submit--after such a trial as ours!" said Mr. Aubrey, calmly.

"How do we know what fraud and perjury may have been resorted to in
order to secure the late verdict, and which we may have the means of
exploding against the next trial? Ah, Mr. Aubrey, you don't know the
character of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap in the profession; they
learn a fresh trick from every scoundrel, swindler, and thief, whose
case they undertake."

"I thought that fraud and perjury were never to be presumed, Mr.
Runnington! Besides, had we not the advantage of most eminent, acute,
and experienced counsel? How could it escape _them_?"

"I would only venture to remind you," said Mr. Runnington, firmly but
respectfully, "of the observations of the Attorney-General, at our last
consultation."

"I thought I was unanswered, Mr. Runnington, though I did not feel at
liberty to press the matter," replied Mr. Aubrey, with a melancholy
smile.

"Excuse me, but we _must_ take the chance of a second trial," said Mr.
Runnington.

"I have decided upon the course I shall adopt," replied Mr. Aubrey,
calmly and determinedly--"I beg you, Mr. Runnington, to write this day
to the gentlemen upon the other side, and inform them that within three
weeks I shall be prepared to deliver up possession of Yatton."

"My dear sir!--Do I hear aright?" exclaimed Mr. Runnington, with some
agitation. "Deliver up possession of the estates? and within three
weeks? My ears are deceiving me!"

"That was what I said--or meant to say--Mr. Runnington," replied Mr.
Aubrey, rather peremptorily.

"I give you my honor, Mr. Aubrey, that in the whole course of my
practice I never heard of such a procedure!" said Mr. Runnington, with a
half-desperate air.

"And I shall further request you to state that the last quarter's rents
are in my banker's hands, and will be paid over to the order of Mr.
Titmouse"----

"Good gracious, Mr. Aubrey!" interrupted Mr. Runnington, with an air of
deep concern.

"I have well considered the position in which I am placed," said Mr.
Aubrey, with a serious air.

"It is very painful for me to mention the subject, Mr. Aubrey; but have
you adverted to the _mesne_ profits?"

"I have. It is, indeed, a very fearful matter: and I frankly own that I
see no way open before me, but to trust to the forbearance of"----

"Forbearance!--The _forbearance_ of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap!! or
of any one counselled by them!"

"Why, what can I do? I might as well undertake to pay off the national
debt as the sum of sixty thousand pounds!"

"That's just the very thing," replied Mr. Runnington, with a dismayed
air.

"Whatever honorable negotiation can effect, I leave it in your hands to
do. With reference to the time which may be allowed for liquidating this
frightful demand"--Mr. Aubrey changed color, but spoke with firmness--"I
must own this to be a matter which has occasioned me inexpressible
anxiety, Mr. Runnington. I really do not see what length of time will
enable me to discharge so vast a sum of money, or even to make any
sensible impression upon it. I am quite at the mercy of my enemies!"
Here both were silent for some time.

"At one time, I fancied that in a case so grievously hard as yours,"
said Mr. Runnington, with a sigh--"you might obtain relief from a Court
of Equity from the payment of the mesne profits, on the ground of your
total ignorance of the title of Titmouse; and I laid a case before the
most skilful lawyer in the Court of Chancery--but alas! the answer was
in the negative--that the court had no power whatever to deprive a man
of what he had proved to be his strict legal rights"----

"Nor can I, Mr. Runnington, see on what principle such an interference
could be supported![8] Besides--can I _entirely_ acquit myself of
negligence? Have I not been culpably forgetful of the suggestions which
you made to me at the time of my marriage settlement? No, no! I feel
myself bound hand and foot"----

At this moment a thundering appeal to the knocker of the door announced
an arrival; and presently the servant entered and stated that Lord
C---- had called, and was waiting in the library. After repeating two or
three directions to Mr. Runnington, Mr. Aubrey left him; and presently
entered the library, where Lord C---- was waiting to receive him. Lord
C---- was a middle-aged man, tall, of elegant person, with a very
handsome and intellectual countenance, and most winning address; he was
a thorough politician, and possessed of eloquence, immense practical
knowledge, and a commanding intellect. He was made for eminent office;
and got through the most complicated and harassing business with ease
and celerity. He had for several years entertained a sincere regard for
Mr. Aubrey, whom he considered to be a very rising man in the House of
Commons, and to have rendered him, on several occasions, special service
in debate. He had been much shocked to hear of the sudden misfortune
which had befallen Mr. Aubrey; and had now come to him with a sincere
desire to be of service; and also, not without a faint hope of
prevailing upon him to come down that evening, and support them in a
very close division. He was as kind-hearted a man as--a keen politician
_could_ be.

"I am really shocked beyond expression to hear all this," said he, after
Aubrey had, at his earnest request, explained the position in which he
was placed; the dreadful loss he had sustained, the still more dreadful
liabilities to which he was subject. "Really," exclaimed his Lordship,
"who can be safe? It might have happened to me--to any of us! Forgive
me, my dear Aubrey," he continued earnestly, "if I venture to express a
hope that at all events Mrs. Aubrey and your family are provided for,
and your very lovely sister; they, I trust, are out of the reach of
inconvenience?" Mr. Aubrey's lips quivered, and he remained silent.

"Allow me a friend's freedom, Aubrey, and let me repeat my question; are
your family provided for?"

"I will be frank, Lord C----," replied Mr. Aubrey, with a strong effort
to preserve his composure. "The little provision which had been made for
them, is lost, with Yatton; but for them--my wife, my children, my
sister--I could have submitted to this misfortune with unshrinking
fortitude; but they are, alas, involved in my ruin! My wife had nothing
when I married her; and of course the settlements I made on her were out
of the Yatton property; as also was the little income left my sister by
my father. With Yatton all is gone--that is the plain fact; and there is
no disguising it."

Lord C---- seemed much moved.

"The Duke of ----, I, and two or three other of your friends, were
talking about these matters last night; we wish we could serve you. What
is the sort of foreign service you would prefer, Aubrey?"

"_Foreign_ service?" echoed Mr. Aubrey, significantly.

"Yes; an entire change of scene would be highly serviceable in diverting
your thoughts from the distressing subjects which here occupy them, and
must continue to occupy them for some time to come. Can there be a doubt
of it?"

"It is very kindly meant, Lord C----; but do you really think I can for
a single moment entertain the idea of quitting the country to escape
from pecuniary liability?"

"That's the point, exactly; I decidedly think you ought to do so; that
you _must_," replied Lord C----, in a matter-of-fact manner.

"Nothing upon earth shall induce me to do so," replied Mr. Aubrey,
firmly. "The bare idea shocks me. It would be the meanest, most
unprincipled conduct--it would reflect disgrace on the king's service."

"Poh--this is mere eccentricity--knight-errantry; I'm sure that when you
are in a calmer mood you will think differently. Upon my honor, I never
heard of such absurdity as yours, in my life. Are you to stay at home,
to have your hands tied behind your back, and be thrust into prison--to
court destruction for yourself and your family?" Mr. Aubrey turned aside
his head, and remained silent.

"I must plead in favor of Mrs. Aubrey--your children--your sweet lovely
sister;--good God! it's quite shocking to think of what you are bringing
them to."

"You torture my feelings, Lord C----," said Mr. Aubrey, tremulously and
very pale; "but you do not convince my judgment. Every dictate of
conscience and honor combines to assure me that I should not listen to
your proposal."

"Good God! what an outrage on common sense!--But has anything been yet
said on the subject of these liabilities--these _mesne_ profits, as I
think you said they are called?"

"Nothing; but they follow as a matter of course."

"How is it that you owe _only_ sixty thousand pounds, Aubrey?"

"_Only_ sixty thousand!" echoed Mr. Aubrey, amazedly.

"At the rate of ten thousand a-year, you must have had at least a
hundred thousand pounds of the money belonging to your successor"----

"The statute of limitations prevents more than six years' arrears being
recoverable."

"But do you intend, Aubrey, to avail yourself of such a protection
against the just claims of this poor, unfortunate, ill-used gentleman?
Are not the remaining forty thousand pounds justly due--money of his
which you have been making away with? Will you let a mere technical rule
of law outweigh the dictates of honor and conscience?"

"I really don't exactly understand your drift, Lord C----," said Mr.
Aubrey, coloring visibly.

"Well--I will explain. Your sovereign has a right to command your
services; and, by obeying him and serving your country, you are enabled
to prevent a malignant opponent from ruining you and your family, by
extorting a vast sum of money not equitably due: I protest I see no
difference in principle, Aubrey, between availing yourself of the
statute of limitations, and of the call of the king to foreign
service;--but we must talk of this again. By the way, what is the name
of your worthy opponent? Tittlemouse, or some such strange name?"

"Titmouse!--By the way, you lose a seat for Yatton," said Aubrey, with a
faint smile.

Lord C---- pricked up his ears. "Ay, ay! how's that?"

"The gentleman whom you have named professes, I understand, Liberal
principles; probably he will sit for the borough himself; at all events,
he will return the member."

"He's a poor ignorant creature, isn't he? What has made him take up with
Liberal principles? By taking a little notice of him early, one
might--eh?--influence him;--but--of course you don't intend to vacate
this session?"

"I intend this day to apply for the Chiltern Hundreds; and this evening,
if you like, a new writ may be moved for the borough of Yatton."

"You _must_ come down to-night, my dear Aubrey, you really must," said
Lord C----, with undisguised anxiety--with more than he had shown during
the interview. "The numbers will run very close; they are stirring
heaven and earth!--Good heavens! my dear Aubrey, a vote's invaluable
to-night;--gad, you _sha'n't_ have the Chiltern Hundreds;[9] you mustn't
really apply for it--at all events, not till to-morrow."

"I shall sit no more in the House of Commons," said Mr. Aubrey, with a
sad determined air; "besides, I leave for Yatton by to-night's mail.
There are those waiting for me whom you would not have me disappoint,
Lord C----!"

"Not for worlds, my dear Aubrey," replied Lord C----, half absently. He
was intensely disappointed at not obtaining Mr. Aubrey's vote that
evening; and rose to go.

"Then I am to direct to Yatton, when I may have occasion to write to
you?" said he.

"For the next three weeks only--my movements after that period are not
yet fixed."

"Adieu, Aubrey; and I entreat of you to remember me most
sincerely to Mrs. Aubrey and your sister; and when you look at
them,--recollect--pray, recollect our conversation of to-day."

With this Lord C---- took his departure, and left poor Aubrey much
depressed. He quickly, however, roused himself, and occupied the
principal part of the day in making the necessary and melancholy
arrangements for breaking up his establishment in Grosvenor Street, and
disposing of his wines, books, and furniture at Yatton. He also
instructed a house-agent to look out for two or three respectable but
small houses in the outskirts of town, out of which might be chosen the
one appearing most suitable to himself and Mrs. Aubrey, on their arrival
in London. About eight o'clock he got into the York mail, and his heart
was heavy within him.




CHAPTER III.


The result of a very long consultation between Mr. Runnington and his
partners, held on the day after his last interview with Mr. Aubrey, was,
that he drew up the following draft of a letter, addressed to Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap:--

                                     "_Lincoln's Inn, 26th April 18--._

     "GENTLEMEN:

                    "_Doe_ d. _Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_.

     "In answer to your letter of yesterday, (the 25th inst.,) we beg to
     inform you, that after the judgment in this cause pronounced
     yesterday in the Court of King's Bench, our client, Mr. Aubrey,
     does not intend to resist the claim of Mr. Titmouse to the residue
     of the Yatton property. We now, therefore, beg to give you notice,
     that on the 17th of next month you will be at liberty, on behalf of
     your client, Mr. Titmouse, to take possession of all the property
     at Yatton, at present in the possession of Mr. Aubrey. The whole of
     the last quarter's rents, due at Ladyday, have been paid into the
     bank of Messrs. Harley at Grilston, and will, on the day above
     mentioned, be placed at the disposal of your client.

     "We are also instructed to request the delivery of your bill at as
     early a period as may suit your convenience, with a view to its
     immediate examination and settlement.

     "We cannot forbear adding, while thus implicitly following the
     instructions of our client, our very great surprise and regret at
     the course which he has thought fit to adopt; since we have the
     strongest reasons for believing, that had he been disposed to
     contest your client's claim farther, in accordance with advice
     received from a high quarter, his case would have been materially
     strengthened, and your difficulties greatly increased,
     and rendered, in fact, absolutely insuperable. We feel confident
     that the magnanimity displayed by our client, will be duly
     appreciated by _yours_.

               "We are, Gentlemen, your obedient servants,

                                                    "RUNNINGTON & CO.

       "MESSRS. QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP."

"Really," said Mr. Runnington, when he had read over the above to his
partners, "I _must_ throw in a word or two about those accursed mesne
profits--yet it's a very ticklish subject, especially with such people
as these--eh?"

One partner shook his head, and the other looked very thoughtful.

"We must not compromise Mr. Aubrey," said the former of the two.

"We have had no instructions on that point," said the latter,--"on the
contrary, you told us yourself that your instructions were to announce
an unconditional surrender."

"That may be; but in so desperate a business as this, I do think we have
a discretion to exercise on behalf of himself and family, which I must
say, he seems quite incapable of exercising himself. Nay, upon my honor,
I think we are _bound_ not to forego the slightest opportunity of
securing an advantage for our client in this unrighteous claim!"

His partners seemed struck with his observation; and Mr. Runnington,
after a few moments' consideration, added the following postscript:--

     "P. S.--As to the _mesne profits_, by the way, of course we
     anticipate no difficulty in effecting an amicable arrangement
     satisfactory to both parties, due consideration being had for the
     critical position in which our client finds himself placed so
     suddenly and unexpectedly. Indeed, it is not difficult to conceive
     that Mr. Aubrey, in taking the step of which we have above
     advised you, must have contemplated"----(here Mr. Runnington paused
     for a considerable time,) "being met in a similar frank, liberal,
     and equitable spirit."

It was agreed, at length, that the whole amount and effect of the above
postscript ought to be regarded as a spontaneous suggestion of Messrs.
Runnington, not in any way implicating, or calculated in any event to
annoy, Mr. Aubrey; and a fair copy of the letter and postscript having
been made, it was signed by the head of the firm, and forthwith
despatched to Saffron Hill.

"Struck, by Jove, Gammon!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, as, with the above
letter open in his hands, he hurried, the instant after he had read it,
into the room of his wily partner, and threw it down exultingly before
him. Gammon read it with apparent calmness, but a slight flush
overspread his cheek; and, as he finished the perusal, a subdued smile
of excitement and triumph stole over his acute and placid countenance.

"Lord, Gammon! isn't it glorious?" quoth Mr. Quirk, heatedly, rubbing
his hands together; "give us your hand, friend Gammon! We've fought a
precious hard battle together"--and he shook his partner's hand with
vehement cordiality. "This fellow Aubrey is a trump--isn't he?--Egad, if
I'd been in his shoes--one way or another, I'd have stuck at Yatton for
a dozen years to come--ah, ha!"

"Yes, I am sure you would--if you had been able," replied Gammon, dryly,
and with a smile--the real character of which was not perceived by Mr.
Quirk.

"Ay, that I would," replied he, with a triumphant chuckle--"but now to
come to business. By next quarter-day Titmouse will have £5,000 in hard
cash--half of it on the 17th of next month.--Lord! what have we done for
him!" he added with a sort of sigh.

"We've put an ape into possession of Paradise--that's all"--said Gammon,
absently and half aloud, and bitterly and contemptuously.

"Humph!--what of that?" said Mr. Quirk--"It answers _our_ purposes, at
any rate! By the way, Gammon, you see what's said about our bill--eh?
The sooner it's made out the better, I should say--and--ahem!
hem!--while Mr. Aubrey's on the tight rope he won't think of looking
down at the particular items, will he? I should say, _now's_ our time;
and we should strike while the iron's hot! I've got _rather_ a stiff
entry, I can assure you. I must say Snap's done his duty; and _I've_ not
had my eyes shut--or my pen idle! You know one _must_ live in these hard
times--eh?" Here Mr. Quirk winked very knowingly.

"You must not _overdo_ it, Mr. Quirk--but all that I leave, as usual, to
your admirable management, as to that of a first-rate man of business.
You know I'm a sad hand at accounts; but you and Snap are perfect
adepts--in short, I'm satisfied you'll do all that should be done."

"Ay, ay, trust us!" interrupted Quirk, quickly, with a significant nod,
and fancying himself and Snap already at work, plundering the poor
Aubreys. "And, by the way, Gammon, there are the mesne profits--that's a
mighty fine postscript of theirs, isn't it?" and replacing his
spectacles, he read it over aloud. "All my eye, of course!" he added, as
he laid down the letter--"but I suppose one must give 'em a little time;
it _is_ a little hard on him just at present; but then, to be sure,
that's _his_ look-out--not ours, or Titmouse's!--Off-hand, I should say
we ought to be content with--say--twenty thousand down, and the rest
within two years, so as to give him time to look about him a little"----

"That will be quite an after consideration," said Mr. Gammon, who, for
the last few minutes, had appeared lost in thought.

"Egad--an _after_ consideration? Hang me if I think so, Gammon! There's
a certain _bond_--eh? don't you recollect"----

"I assure you, Mr. Quirk, that my eye is fixed quite as steadily and
anxiously on that point as yours," said Gammon, gravely.

"Thank you--thank you, Gammon!" replied Quirk, with the air of a man
suddenly relieved from apprehension--"it couldn't possibly be in better
hands. Lud--to go wrong _there_! It would send me to my grave at a hand
gallop--it would, so help me Heaven, Gammon!--Titmouse--by the way--is a
queer hand to deal with--isn't he? Wasn't he strange and bumptious the
other day? Egad, it made me quake! Need we tell him, just yet," he
dropped his voice, "of the letter we've got? Couldn't we safely say only
that they have sent us word that we shall have Yatton by the 17th of
next month?"

"Very great caution is necessary, Mr. Quirk, just now"----

"You _don't_ think the young scamp's going to turn round on us, and snap
his fingers in our face, eh?" inquired Mr. Quirk, apprehensively,
violently twirling about his watch-key.

"If you leave him implicitly to me, you shall get all you want," replied
Gammon, very gravely, and very pointedly. Quirk's color changed a
little, as he felt the keen gray eye of Gammon fixed upon him, and he
involuntarily shrank under it.

"You'll excuse me, Gammon," at length said he, with rather a disturbed
air; "but there's no fathoming you, when you get into one of your
mysterious humors; and you always look so particularly strange whenever
we get on this subject! What can you know that I don't--or _ought_ not
to know?"

"Nothing--nothing, I assure you," replied Gammon, with a gay smile.

"Well, I should have _thought_ not. But, coming back to the main point,
if one could but _touch_ some part of that same ten thousand pounds, I
_should_ be a happy man!--Consider Gammon, what a draught there has been
on my purse for this last sixteen months! Ecod!--the sleepless nights it
has cost me!"

"Well, can you doubt being soon richly repaid, my dear sir? Only don't
be too hasty."

"I take it, Gammon, we've a lien on the rents now in the banker's hands,
and to become due next quarter-day, and on the first instalment of the
mesne profits, both for our bill of costs, and in respect of that same
bond?"

"Mesne profits, Mr. Quirk?" echoed Gammon, rather quickly; "you seem to
take it for granted that they are all ready to be paid over! Even
supposing Titmouse not to grow restive, do you suppose it probable that
Mr. Aubrey, after so vast and sudden a sacrifice, can have more than a
very few thousands--probably hundreds--to keep him and his family from
immediate want, since we have reason to believe he has got no other
resources than Yatton?"

"Not got 'em--not got 'em? D--n him! then he must look sharp and _get_
'em, that's all! You know we can't be trifled with; we must look after
the interests of--Titmouse. And what's he to start with, if there's no
mesne profits forthcoming? But, hang it! they must; I should say a
gentle pressure, by-and-by, as soon as Aubrey's fairly got out of
Yatton, must produce money, or _security_--he must know quantities of
people of rank and substance that would rush forward, if they once heard
him squeal"----

"Ah, you're for putting the thumbscrews on at once--eh?" inquired
Gammon, with subdued energy, and a very strange sort of smile.

"Ay--capital--that's _just_ what I meant!"--quoth Quirk.

"Eugh! you heartless old reprobate!" thought Gammon, nearly on the point
of expressing as much; but his momentary excitement passed off
unobserved by Mr. Quirk. "And, I must say, I agree with you," added
Gammon, calmly, "we ought in justice to see you first reimbursed your
very heavy outlays, Mr. Quirk."

"Well, that's honorable, Gammon.--Oh, Gammon, how I _wish_ you would let
me make a friend of you!" suddenly added Mr. Quirk, eying wistfully his
surprised companion.

"If you have one sincere, disinterested friend in the world, Mr. Quirk,
I am he," said Mr. Gammon, throwing great warmth into his manner,
perceiving that Mr. Quirk was laboring with some communication of which
he wished to deliver himself.

"Gammon, Gammon! how I _wish_ I could think so!" replied Quirk, looking
earnestly, yet half distrustingly, at Gammon, and fumbling about his
hands in his pockets. The mild and friendly expression of Gammon's
countenance, however, invited communicativeness; and after softly
opening and shutting the two doors, to ascertain that no one was trying
to overhear what might be passing, he returned to his chair, which he
drew closer to Gammon, who noticed this air of preparation with not a
little curiosity.

"I may be wrong, Gammon," commenced Mr. Quirk, in a low tone; "but I do
believe you've always felt a kind of personal friendship towards me; and
there ought to be no secrets among friends. _Friends_, indeed? Perhaps
it's premature to mention so small a matter; but at a certain
silversmith's, not a thousand miles from the Strand, there's at this
moment in hand, as a present from me to you"--(Oh dear, dear! Mr. Quirk!
what a shocking untruth! and at your advanced period of life, too!)--"as
elegant a gold snuff-box as can be made, with a small inscription on the
lid. I hope you won't value it the less for its being the gift of old
Caleb Quirk"----he paused and looked earnestly at Mr. Gammon.

"My dear Mr. Quirk, you have taken me," said his bland partner,
apparently with great emotion, "quite by surprise. Value it? I will
preserve it to the latest moment of my life, as a memorial of one whom
the more I know of, the more I respect and admire!"

"You, Gammon, are in your prime--scarce even that--but I am growing
old"----tears appeared to glisten in the old gentleman's eyes; Gammon,
looking much moved, shook him cordially by the hand in silence,
wondering what upon earth was coming next. "Yes;--old Caleb Quirk's day
is drawing to a close--I feel it, Gammon, I feel it! But I shall leave
behind me--a--a--child--an only daughter, Gammon;" that gentleman gazed
at the speaker with an expression of respectful sympathy;--"Dora: I
don't think you can have known Dora so long, Gammon, without feeling a
_leetle_ interest in her!" Here Gammon's color mounted rapidly; and he
looked with feelings of a novel description at his senior partner. Could
it be possible that old Quirk wished to bring about a match between his
daughter and Mr. Gammon? That gentleman's thoughts were for a moment
confused. All he could do was to bow with an earnest--an anxious--a
deprecating air; and Mr. Quirk, rather hastily, proceeded,--"and when I
assure you, Gammon, that it is in your power to make an old friend and
his only daughter happy and proud,"--Gammon began to draw his breath
hurriedly, and to look more and more apprehensively at his senior
partner,--"in short, my dear friend Gammon, let me out with it at
once--my daughter's over head and ears in love with Titmouse! She is, so
help me Heaven!"

["Whew!" thought Gammon, suddenly and infinitely relieved.]

"Ah, my dear sir, is that all?" he exclaimed, and shook Mr. Quirk
cordially by the hand,--"at length you have made a friend of me indeed!
But, to tell you the truth, I have long suspected as much; I have
indeed!"

"Have you really? Hang me if anything can escape your lynx's
eyes!--Well! there _is_ no accounting for tastes, is there?--especially
among the women? Poor Dora's quite lost her heart--quite--she has--so
help me Heaven!" continued Mr. Quirk, energetically.

"Well, my dear sir, and why this _surprise_?" inquired Gammon,
earnestly. "I consider Titmouse to be a very handsome young fellow; and
that he is already rapidly acquiring very gentlemanly manners; and as to
his _fortune_--really--when one thinks of the thing--it would be most
desirable to bring it about! Indeed, the sooner his heart's fixed, and
his word's pledged, the better--for you must of course be aware that
there will be many schemers on the look-out to entrap his frank and
inexperienced nature--look, for instance, at Tag-rag."

"Eugh!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, with a sudden motion of sickening
disgust--"the old beast! I smoked him long ago! Now, _that_ I call
villany, Gammon; infernal villany! Don't you?"

"Indeed, indeed, Mr. Quirk, I do; I quite agree with you! Upon my honor,
I think it is a part of even _my_ duty towards our confiding and
inexperienced client, if possible, to protect him against such infamous
designs."

"Right--right, Gammon; by Jove, you're quite right--I _quite_ agree
with you!" replied Quirk, earnestly, not observing the lambent smile
upon the features of his calm, crafty, and sarcastic companion.

"You see, however," said Gammon, "we've a very delicate and difficult
game to play with old Tag-rag. He's certainly a toad, ugly and
venomous--but then he's got a jewel in his head--he's got money, you
know, and, to serve _our_ purposes, we must really give him some hopes
about his daughter and Titmouse."

"Faugh! eugh! feugh! Nasty wretch! a little trollop! It makes one sick
to hear of her! And, by the way, now we're on that subject, Gammon, what
do we want of this wretch Tag-rag, now that Titmouse has actually got
the property?"

"Want of him? Money--security, my dear sir!--money!"

"But, curse me! (excuse me, Gammon,) why go to Tag-rag? _That's_ what I
can't understand! Surely any one will advance almost any amount of money
to Titmouse, with such security as he can now give!"

"Very possibly--probably"----

"Possibly? Why, I myself don't mind advancing him five thousand--nay,
ten thousand pounds--when we've once got hold of the title-deeds."

"My dear sir," interrupted Gammon, calmly, but with a very serious air,
and a slight change of color which did not happen to attract the notice
of his eager companion, "there are reasons why I should dissuade you
from doing so; upon my word there are; farther than that I do not think
it necessary to go; but I have gone far enough, I know well, to do you a
real service."

Mr. Quirk listened to all this with an air of the utmost amazement--even
open-mouthed amazement. "What reason, Gammon, _can_ there be against my
advancing money on a security worth at least twenty times the sum
borrowed?" he inquired with visible distrust of his companion.

"I can but assure you, that were I called upon to say whether I would
advance a serious sum of money to Titmouse on the security of the Yatton
estates, I should at all events require a most substantial _collateral_
security."

"Mystery again!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, a sigh of vexation escaping him.
"You'll excuse me, Gammon, but you'd puzzle an angel, to say nothing of
the devil! May I presume for one moment, so far on our personal and
professional relationship, as to ask what the reason is on which your
advice rests?"

"Mere caution--excessive caution--anxiety to place you out of the way of
all risk. Surely, is your borrower so soon to be pronounced firm in the
saddle?"

"If you know anything, Gammon, that I don't, it's your bounden duty to
communicate it! _Look at our articles!_"

"It is; _but do I_ know anything! Prove that, Mr. Quirk, and you need
trouble yourself no more!--but, in the mean while, (without saying how
much I feel hurt at your evident distrust,) I have but a word or two
further to add on this point."

When Mr. Gammon chose, he could assume an expression of feature, a tone
of voice, and a manner which indicated to the person he was addressing,
that he was announcing a matured opinion, an inflexible
determination--and this, moreover, in the calmest, quietest way
imaginable. Thus it was that he now said to Mr. Quirk, "My opinion is,
that you should get _some third party_ or parties to advance any
required sum, and prevail upon Tag-rag to join in a collateral security,
without--if possible--making him aware of the extent of liability he is
incurring. By exciting him with the ridiculous notion of an attachment
between his daughter and Titmouse, he may be induced to give his
signature, as to some complimentary matter of form only--Now, that's my
opinion, Mr. Quirk; not lightly or hastily formed; and it rests upon a
deep feeling of personal regard towards you, and also our common
interests."

Mr. Quirk had listened to this communication in perturbed silence, eying
the speaker with a ludicrous expression of mingled chagrin,
apprehension, and bewilderment. "Gammon," at length said he, affecting a
smile, "do you remember, when you, and I, and Dora, went to the play to
see some German thing or other--Foss was the name, wasn't it?"

"Faust--Faust," interrupted Gammon, curiously.

"Well; and now, what was the name of that fellow that was
always--Meph--Meph--what was it?"

"Mephistopheles," replied Gammon, unable to repress a smile.

"Ah--yes! so it was. That's all; I only wanted to think of the name--I'd
forgotten it. I beg your pardon, Gammon."

This was poor Mr. Quirk's way of being very sarcastic with his friend.
He thought that he had now cut him to the very quick.

"If it hadn't been for what's passed between us to-day, Gammon, I should
almost begin to think that you were not sincere in your friendship"----

"Did I ever deceive you? Did I ever attempt to overreach you in
anything, Mr. Quirk?"

"N--o--o--," replied Mr. Quirk--but not in the readiest manner, or most
confident tone in the world,--"I certainly can't say I ever found you
out--but I'll tell you what, we each keep a precious sharp look-out
after each other, too--don't we?" he inquired with a faint smile, which
seemed for a moment reflected upon the face of Gammon.

"How long," said the latter, "I am to be the subject of such unkind
suspicions, I do not know; but your nature is suspicious; and as every
one has his fault, that is the alloy in the otherwise pure gold of your
manly, generous, and straightforward character. Time may show how you
have wronged me. My anxious wish is, Mr. Quirk, to witness your daughter
occupying a position in which we may all be proud to see her." Here a
smile shot across Quirk's anxious countenance, like evening sunshine on
troubled waters.

"I do really believe, Gammon," said he, eagerly, "that Dora's just the
kind of girl to suit Titmouse"----

"So indeed, my dear sir, do I. There's a mingled softness and spirit in
Miss Quirk"----

"She's a good girl, a good girl, Gammon! I hope he'll use her well if he
gets her." His voice trembled. "She's got very much attached to him!
Gad, she's quite altered lately; and my sister tells me that she's
always playing dismal music when he's not there. But we can talk over
these matters at another time. Gad, Gammon, you can't think how it's
relieved me, to open my mind to you on this matter! We quite understand
each other _now_, Gammon--eh?"

"Quite," replied Gammon, pointedly; and Mr. Quirk having quitted the
room, the former prepared to answer Messrs. Runnington's letter. But
first he leaned back, and reflected on several points of their late
conversation. Of course, he had resolved that Miss Quirk should never
become Mrs. Titmouse! And what struck him as not a little singular was
this; viz. that Mr. Quirk should have made no observation on the
circumstance that Gammon allowed him to risk his daughter, and her all,
upon chances which he pronounced too frail to warrant advancing a
thousand or two of money! Yet so it was.

This was the answer he presently wrote to the letter of Messrs.
Runnington:--

                                     "_Saffron Hill, 26th April 18--._

     "GENTLEMEN:

                      "_Doe_ d. _Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_.

     "We are favored with your letter of this day's date; and beg to
     assure you how very highly we appreciate the prompt and honorable
     course which has been taken by your client, under circumstances
     calculated to excite the greatest possible commiseration. Every
     expression of respectful sympathy, on our parts, and on that of our
     client, Mr. Titmouse, which you may think fit to convey to your
     distinguished client, is his.

     "We shall be prepared to receive possession of the Yatton estates
     on the day you mention--namely, the 17th May next, on behalf of our
     client, Mr. Titmouse; on whose behalf, also, we beg to thank you
     for your communication concerning the last quarter's rents.

     "With reference to the question of the mesne profits, we cannot
     doubt that your client will promptly pursue the same line of
     honorable conduct which he has hitherto adopted; and sincerely
     trust that a good understanding in this matter will speedily exist
     between our respective clients.

     "As you have intimated a wish upon the subject, we beg to inform
     you that we have given instructions for making out and delivering
     our bill herein.

                              "We are, Gentlemen,
                                    "Your obedient humble servants,
                                               "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP.

     "MESSRS. RUNNINGTON & CO."

Having finished writing the above letter, Gammon sat back in his chair,
with folded arms, and entered upon a long train of thought--revolving
many matters which were worthy of the profound consideration they then
received.

When Gammon and Titmouse returned to town from York, they were fortunate
in having the inside of the coach to themselves for nearly the whole of
the way--an opportunity which Gammon improved to the utmost, by
deepening the impression he had already made in the mind of Titmouse,
of the truth of one great fact--namely, that he and his fortunes would
quickly part company, if Gammon should at any time so will--which never
would, however, come to pass, as long as Titmouse recognized and
deferred to the authority of Gammon in all things. In vain did Titmouse
inquire how this could be. Gammon was impenetrable, mysterious,
authoritative; and at length enjoined Titmouse to absolute secrecy
concerning the existence of the fact in question, on pain of the
infliction of those consequences to which I have already alluded. Gammon
assured him that there were many plans and plots hatching against him
(Titmouse;) but that it was in his (Gammon's) power to protect him from
them all. Gammon particularly enjoined him, moreover, to consult the
feelings, and attend to the suggestions of Mr. Quirk, wherever Mr.
Gammon did not intimate to the contrary; and wound up all by telling
him, that as he, Gammon, was the only person on earth--and this he
really believed to be the case, as the reader may hereafter see--who
knew the exact position of Titmouse, so he had devoted himself for his
life to the advancing and securing the interests of that fortunate
gentleman.

For about a fortnight after their return, Titmouse, at Gammon's
instance, continued at his former lodgings; but at length complained so
earnestly of their dismal quietude, and of their being out of the way of
"_life_," that Gammon yielded to his wishes, and, together with Mr.
Quirk, consented to his removing to a central spot--in fact, to the
CABBAGE-STALK HOTEL, Covent Garden--a queer enough name, to be sure; but
it was the family name of a great wholesale green-grocer, who owned most
of the property thereabouts. It was not without considerable uneasiness
and anxiety that Messrs. Quirk and Snap beheld this change of residence,
apprehensive that it might have the effect of estranging Titmouse from
them; but since Gammon assented to it, they had nothing for it but to
acquiesce, considering Titmouse's proximity to his splendid
independence. They resolved, however, as far as in each of them lay, not
to let themselves be forgotten by Titmouse. Pending the rule for the new
trial, Mr. Quirk had been so confident concerning the issue, that he
greatly increased the allowance of Titmouse; to an extent, indeed, which
admitted of his entering into almost all the gayeties that his as yet
scarce initiated heart could desire. In the first place, he constantly
added to his wardrobe. Then he took lessons, every other day, in "the
noble art of self-defence;" which gave him an opportunity of forming,
with great ease, at once an extensive and brilliant circle of
acquaintance. Fencing-rooms, wrestling-rooms, shooting-galleries, places
for pigeon-shooting, cock-fighting, dog-fighting, and billiard-rooms;
the water, and boat-racing--these were the dazzling scenes which
occupied the chief portion of each day. Then, in the evenings, there
were theatres, great and small, the various taverns, and other places of
nocturnal resort, which are the secret pride and glory of the
metropolis. In addition to this, at an advanced period of the night, or
rather very early hour in the morning, he sedulously strove to perfect
himself in those higher arts and accomplishments, formerly excelled in
by one or two of the more eminent of the youthful aristocracy, viz.
breaking windows, pulling bells, wrenching off knockers,[10]
extinguishing lamps, tripping up old women, watchmen, and children, and
spoiling their clothes;--ah, how often in his humbler days, had his
heart panted in noble rivalry of such feats as these, and emulation of
the notoriety which they earned for the glittering miscreants excelling
in them! Ah, Titmouse, Titmouse! Now is your time! _Macte novâ virtute,
puer!_

That he could long frequent such scenes as these without forming an
extensive and varied acquaintance, would be a very unlikely thing to
suppose; and there was one who would fain have joined him in his new
adventures--one who, as I have already intimated, had initiated him into
the scenes with which he was now becoming so familiar; I mean Snap, who
had been at once his

    "Guide, philosopher, and friend;"

but who now had fewer and fewer opportunities of associating with him,
inasmuch as his (Snap's) nose was continually "kept at the grindstone"
in Saffron Hill, to compensate for the lack of attention to the business
of the office of his senior partners, owing to their incessant
occupation with the affairs of Titmouse. Still, however, he now and then
contrived to remind Titmouse of his (Snap's) existence, by sending him
intimations of interesting trials at the Old Bailey and elsewhere, and
securing him a good seat to view both the criminal and the
spectators--often persons of the greatest rank, fashion, and beauty; for
so it happened that, in this country, the more hideous the crime, the
more intense the curiosity of the upper classes of both sexes to witness
the miscreant perpetrator; the more disgusting the details, the greater
the avidity with which they are listened to by the distinguished
auditors;--the reason being plain, that, as they have exhausted the
pleasures and excitements afforded by their own sphere of action and
enjoyment, their palled and sated appetites require novel and more
powerful stimulants. Hence, at length, we see "fashionables" peopling
even the condemned cell--rushing, in excited groups, after the
shuddering malefactor, staggering, half palsied, and with horror-laden
eye, on his way to the gallows! As soon as old Quirk had obtained an
inkling of Titmouse's taste in these matters, he afforded him many
opportunities of gratifying it. Once or twice the old gentleman
succeeded in obtaining for him, even the gratification of shaking the
cold and pinioned hands of wretches within a few minutes' time of their
being led out for execution!

This is a brief and general account of the way in which Titmouse passed
his time, and laid the groundwork of that solid, extensive, and
practical acquaintance with men and things, which was requisite to
enable him to occupy with dignity and advantage the splendid station to
which he was on the point of being elevated.

But let us not lose sight of our early and interesting friends, the
Tag-rags--a thing which both Quirk and Gammon resolved should not happen
to Titmouse: for, on the very first Sunday after his arrival in town
from York, a handsome glass-coach might have been seen, about two
o'clock in the afternoon, drawing up opposite to the gates of Satin
Lodge; from which said coach, the door having been opened, presently
descended Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Titmouse. Now, the Tag-rags always
dined at about two o'clock on Sundays; and, on the present occasion,
Mr., Mrs., and Miss Tag-rag, together with a pretty constant visitor,
the Reverend Dismal Horror, were sitting at their dinner-table
discussing as savory a leg of roast pork, with apple-sauce, as could at
once have tempted and satisfied the most fastidious and the most
indiscriminating appetite.

"Oh, ma!" exclaimed Miss Tag-rag, faintly, changing color, as she caught
sight, through the blinds, of the approaching visitors--"if there isn't
Mr. Titmouse!" and almost dropping on the table her plate, in which,
with an air of tender gallantry, pious Mr. Horror was in the act of
depositing some greens, she flew out of the room, darted up-stairs, and
in a trice was standing, with beating heart, before her glass, hastily
twirling her ringlets round her trembling fingers, and making one or two
slight alterations in her dress. Her papa and mamma started up at the
same moment, hastily wiping their mouths on the corners of the
table-cloth; and, after a hurried apology to their reverend and
astounded guest, whom they begged "to go on eating till they came
back"--they bounced into the little drawing-room, in just time enough to
appear (as they thought) to have been seated there for some time; but
they were both rather red in the face, and flustered in their manner.
Yet, how abortive was their attempt to disguise the truly disgraceful
fact of their having been at dinner when their distinguished visitors
arrived! For, firstly, the house was redolent of the odors of roast
pork, sage and onion stuffing, and greens; secondly, the red-faced
servant girl was peering round the corner of the kitchen stairs, as if
watching an opportunity to whip off a small dinner tray that stood
between the dining-room and drawing-room; and thirdly, the visitors
caught a glimpse of the countenance of the reverend young guest, who was
holding open the dining-room door just wide enough to enable him to see
who passed on to the drawing-room; for, in truth, the name which had
escaped from the lips of Miss Tag-rag, was one which always excited
unpleasant feelings in the breast of her spiritual-minded friend.

"Ah! Mr. and Mrs. Tag-rag! 'Pon my soul--glad to see you--and--hope
you're all well?" commenced Titmouse, with an air of easy confidence and
grace. Mr. Gammon calmly introduced himself and Mr. Quirk.

"We were just going to sit down to--_lunch_," said Mr. Tag-rag,
hurriedly.

"You won't take a little, will you, gentlemen?" inquired Mrs. Tag-rag,
faintly; and both the worthy couple felt infinite relief on being
assured that the great people "had already lunched." Neither Mr. nor
Mrs. Tag-rag could take their eyes off Mr. Titmouse, whose easy
nonchalance convinced them that he must have been keeping the society
of lords. He was just inquiring--as he ran his hand through his hair,
and gently smacked his slight ebony cane against his leg--after Miss
Tag-rag, when, pale and agitated, and holding in her hand a
pocket-handkerchief, which she had first suffused with musk and
bergamot, designed to overcome so much of the vulgar odor of dinner as
might be lingering about _her_--that interesting young lady entered.
Titmouse rose and received her in a familiar, forward manner; she
turning white and red by turns. She looked such a shrivelled little ugly
formal creature, that Titmouse conceived quite a hatred of her, through
recollecting that he had once thought such an inferior piece of goods
superfine! Old Quirk and Tag-rag, every now and then, cast distrustful
glances at each other; but Gammon kept all in a calm flow of small talk,
which at length restored those whom they had come to see, to something
like self-possession. As for Mr. Quirk, the more he looked at Miss
Tag-rag, the more pride and satisfaction he felt in reflecting upon the
unfavorable contrast she must present, in Titmouse's eyes, to Miss
Quirk. After a little further conversation, principally concerning the
brilliant success of Titmouse, Mr. Quirk came to the business of the
day, and invited Mr., Mrs., and Miss Tag-rag to dinner at Alibi House,
on the ensuing Sunday, at six o'clock--apologizing for the absence of
Miss Quirk, on the score of indisposition--she being at the time in the
highest possible state of health. Mrs. Tag-rag was on the point of
saying something deprecatory of their dining out on Sunday, as contrary
to their rule; but a sudden recollection of the earthly interests she
might peril by so doing, aided by a fearfully significant glance from
Mr. Tag-rag, restrained her. The invitation was, therefore, accepted in
a very obsequious manner; and soon afterwards their great visitors took
their departure, leaving Mr. and Mrs. and Miss Tag-rag in a state of
very great excitement. Goodness! could there be a doubt that there must
be some very potent attraction at Satin Lodge to bring thither Titmouse,
after all that had occurred? And where could reside the point of that
attraction, but in Miss Tag-rag?

As soon as their visitors' glass-coach had driven off--its inmates
laughing heartily at the people they had just quitted--Mr., Mrs., and
Miss Tag-rag returned to the dining-table, like suddenly disturbed fowl
returning to their roost, when the disturbance has ceased. Profuse were
their apologies to Mr. Horror; not aware, however, that he had improved
the opportunity afforded by their absence, to recruit his exhausted
energies with a couple of glasses of port wine from a decanter which
stood on the sideboard--a circumstance which he did not deem important
enough to mention. Vehemently suspecting as he did, what was the state
of things with reference to Mr. Titmouse and Miss Tag-rag, it was
somewhat of a trial of temper to the exemplary young pastor--and
calculated to interfere grievously with the preparation for his evening
duties--to have to listen, for the remainder of the afternoon, to the
praises of Titmouse, and speculations concerning the immensity of his
fortune--matters, indeed, (in his pious estimation,) _of the earth_,
_earthy_. In vain did the worthy minister strive, every now and then, to
divert the current of conversation into a more profitable channel--_i.
e._ towards himself; all he said was evidently lost upon her for whose
ear it was intended. She was in a revery, and often sighed. The
principal figures before her mind's eye were--TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE,
ESQUIRE, and THE REV. DISMAL HORROR. The latter was about twenty-six,
(he had been "called to the work of the ministry" in his sixteenth
year;) short in stature; his face slightly pitted with small-pox; his
forehead narrow; his eyes cold and watery; no eyebrows or whiskers; high
cheek-bones; his short dark hair combed primly forward over each
temple, and twisted into a sort of topknot in front; he wore no
shirt-collar, but had a white neck-handkerchief tied very formally, and
was dressed in an ill-made suit of black. He spoke in a drawling,
canting tone; and his countenance was overspread with a demure
expression of--CUNNING, _trying to look religious_. Then he was always
talking about himself, and his chapel, and the devil, and the bottomless
pit, and the number of souls which he had saved, and the number of those
whom he knew were damned, and many more who certainly would be damned;
and other cheerful and interesting matters of that sort, intrusted--it
would seem--to his confidential keeping. All this might be very well in
its way, began to think Miss Tag-rag--but it was possible to choke a dog
with pudding. Poor girl, can you wonder at her dwelling fondly upon the
image of Titmouse? So splendidly dressed, so handsome, such a
fashionable air, and with--ten thousand a-year! When she put all these
things together, it almost looked like a dream; such good fortune could
never be in store for a poor simple girl like herself. Yet there was
such a thing as--love at first sight! After tea they all walked down to
Mr. Horror's meeting-house. It was very crowded; and it was remarked
that the eloquent young preacher had never delivered a more impassioned
sermon from that pulpit: it was sublime. Oh, how bitterly he denounced
"worldly-mindedness!" What a vivid picture he drew of the flourishing
green bay-tree of the wicked, suddenly blasted in the moment of its
pride and strength; while the righteous should shine like stars in the
firmament forever and ever! Who cannot see here shadowed out the
characters of Titmouse and of Horror respectively?--who hesitate between
the two? And when at length, the sermon over, he sat down in his pulpit,
(the congregation also sitting and singing, which had a somewhat queer
effect,) and drew gracefully across his damp forehead his white
pocket-handkerchief, which had been given him by Miss Tag-rag; and
looked with an air of most interesting languor and exhaustion towards
Mr. Tag-rag's pew, where sat that young lamb of his flock--Miss
Tag-rag--her father the wealthiest man in the congregation, and she his
only child--he felt a most lively and tender interest in her
welfare--her spiritual welfare, and resolved to call the next morning;
entertaining an humble hope of finding that his zealous labors had not
been in vain, that he had not missed the mark at which he had been
secretly aiming! Was one fruit of the pious pastor's exertions the
benignant temper which Tag-rag, to the amazement of his shopmen, evinced
the next morning, for at least an hour? Would that the like good effects
had been visible in Mrs. and Miss Tag-rag; but--alas that I should have
to record it!--it was so far otherwise, that they laid aside some
fancy-fair work on which Mr. Horror had set them--for the whole week,
devoting it, instead, to the preparation of those dresses with which
they purposed the profanation of the ensuing Sunday.

That day at length arrived, and precisely at six o'clock a genteel fly
deposited the visitants from Satin Lodge at the splendid entrance to
Alibi House. There was the big footman--shoulder-knot, red breeches, and
all. Tag-rag felt a _little_ nervous. Before they had entered the gates,
the fond proud parents had kissed their trembling daughter, and
entreated her "to keep her spirits up!" The exhortation was needful; for
when she saw the sort of style that awaited them, she became not a
little agitated. When she entered the hall--ah! on a chair lay a glossy
new hat, and a delicate ebony walking-stick; so he had come--was then
up-stairs!--Miss Tag-rag trembled in every limb.

"I don't know, my dear," whispered Mrs. Tag-rag to her husband, with a
subdued sigh, as they followed the splendid footman up-stairs,--"it may
be all uncommon grand; but somehow I'm afraid we're doing wrong--it's
the Lord's Day--see if any good comes of it."

"Tut--hold your tongue! Let's have no nonsense," sternly whispered Mr.
Tag-rag to his submissive wife.

"Your name, sir?" quoth the footman, in a sort of gentlemanly way.

"Mr., Mrs., and Miss Tag-rag," replied Mr. Tag-rag, after clearing his
throat; and so they were announced, Miss Quirk coming forward to receive
the ladies with the most charming affability. There stood Titmouse, in
an easy attitude, with his hands stuck into his coat-pockets, and
resting on his hips, in a very delicate and elegant fashion. How
completely he seemed at his ease!

"Oh Lord!" thought the almost trembling Tag-rag, "that's the young
fellow I used to go on so to!"

In due time dinner was announced; and who can describe the rapture that
thrilled through the bosoms of the three Tag-rags, when Mr. Quirk
requested Mr. Titmouse to take down--Miss Tag-rag!! Her father took down
Mrs. Alias; Mr. Quirk, Mrs. Tag-rag; and Gammon, Miss Quirk. She really
might have been proud of her partner. Gammon was about thirty-six years
old; above the average height; with a very easy, calm, gentlemanly
appearance and address, and an intellectual and even handsome
countenance; though it occasionally exhibited, to a keen observer, a
sinister expression. He wore a blue coat, a plain white waistcoat, (not
disfigured by any glistening fiddle-faddle of pins, chains, or
quizzing-glasses,) black trousers, and plain black silk stockings. There
was at once an appearance of neatness and carelessness; and there was
such a ready smile--such a bland ease and self-possession about him--as
communicated itself to those whom he addressed. I hardly know, Mr.
Gammon, why I have thus noticed so particularly your outward appearance.
It certainly, on the occasion I am describing, struck me much; but there
are such things as _whited walls_ and _painted sepulchres_!

Dinner went off very pleasantly, the wines soon communicating a little
confidence to the flustered guests. Mrs. Tag-rag had drunk so much
champagne--an unusual beverage for her--that almost as soon as she had
returned to the drawing-room, she sat down on the sofa and fell asleep,
leaving the two young ladies to amuse each other as best they might; for
Mrs. Alias was very deaf, and moreover very stiff and distant, and sat
looking at them in silence. To return to the dining-room for a moment.
'T was quite delightful to see the sort of friendship that seemed to
grow up between Quirk and Tag-rag, as their heads got filled with wine;
at the same time each of them half unconsciously drawing closer and
closer to Titmouse, who sat between them--volubility itself. They soon
dropped all disguise--each plainly under the impression that the other
could not, or did not, observe him; and at length, impelled by their
overmastering motives, they became so barefaced in their
sycophancy--evidently forgetting that Gammon was present--that he could
several times, with only the utmost difficulty, refrain from bursting
into laughter at the earnest devotion with which these two worshippers
of the little golden calf strove to attract the attention of their
divinity, and recommend themselves to its favor.

At length the four gentlemen repaired to the drawing-room, whence issued
the sounds of music; and on entering, they beheld the two lovely
performers seated at the piano, engaged upon a duet. The plump
flaxen-haired Miss Quirk, in her flowing white muslin dress, her thick
gold chain and massive bracelets, formed rather a strong contrast to
her sallow skinny little companion, in a span-new slate-colored silk
dress, with staring scarlet sash; her long corkscrew ringlets glistening
in bear's grease; and as for their performance, Miss Quirk played boldly
and well through her part, a smile of contempt now and then beaming over
her countenance at the ridiculous incapacity of her companion. As soon
as the gentlemen made their appearance the ladies ceased, and withdrew
from the piano, Miss Tag-rag, with a sweet air of simplicity and
conscious embarrassment, gliding towards the sofa, where sat her mamma
asleep, but whom she at once awoke. Mr. Quirk exclaimed, as evidently
elevated with wine, he slapped his daughter on her fat back, "Ah, Dora,
my dove!" while Tag-rag kissed his daughter's cheek, and squeezed her
hand, and then glanced with a proud and delighted air at Titmouse, who
was lolling at full length upon the other sofa, picking his teeth. While
Miss Quirk was making tea, Gammon gayly conversing with her, and in an
undertone satirizing Miss Tag-rag, the latter young lady was gazing,
with a timid air, at the various elegant nick-nacks scattered upon the
tables and slabs. One of these consisted of a pretty little box, about a
foot square, with a glass lid, through which she saw the contents; and
they not a little surprised her. They were pieces of cord; and on
looking at one of the sides of the box, she read with a sudden
shudder,--"_With these cords were tied the hands of Arthur Grizzlegut,
executed for high treason, 1st May 18--. Presented, as a mark of
respect, to Caleb Quirk, Esq., by J---- K----._" Poor Miss Tag-rag
recoiled from the box as if she had seen it filled with writhing adders.
She took an early opportunity, however, of calling her father's
attention to it; and he pronounced it a "most inte_rest_ing object," and
fetched Mrs. Tag-rag to see it. She agreed, first, with her daughter;
and then with her husband. Quietly pushing her investigations, Miss
Tag-rag by-and-by beheld a large and splendidly bound volume--in fact,
Miss Quirk's album; and, after turning over most of the leaves, and
glancing over the "poetical effusions" and "prose sentiments" which few
fools can abstain from depositing upon the embossed pages, when
solicited by the lovely proprietresses of such works, behold--her heart
fluttered--poor Miss Tag-rag almost dropped the magnificent volume; for
there was the idolized name of Mr. Titmouse appended to some beautiful
poetry--no doubt his own handwriting and composition. She read it over
eagerly again and again:--

    "Tittlebat Titmouse Is My name,
      England Is My Nation,
    London Is My Dwelling-Place,
      And Christ Is My Salvation."

How exquisite--how touching its simplicity! She looked anxiously about
for writing implements! but not seeing any, was at length obliged to
trust to her memory; on which, indeed, the remarkable composition was
already inscribed in indelible characters. Miss Quirk, who was watching
her movements, guessed the true cause of her excitement; and a smile of
mingled scorn and pity for her infatuated delusion shone upon her face;
in which, however, there appeared a little anxiety when she beheld
Titmouse--(she did not perceive that he did so in consequence of a
motion from Gammon, whose eye governed his movements as a man's those of
his spaniel)--walk up to her, and converse with a great appearance of
interest. At length Mr. Tag-rag's "carriage" was announced. Mr. Quirk
gave his arm to Mrs. Tag-rag, and Mr. Titmouse to the daughter; who
endeavored, as she went down the stairs, to direct melting glances at
her handsome and distinguished companion. They evidently _told_, for she
could not be mistaken; he certainly once or twice squeezed her arm--and
the last fond words he uttered to her were, "'Pon my soul--it's early;
devilish sorry your going--hope you've enjoyed yourself!" As the
Tag-rags drove home, they were all loud in the praises of those whose
splendid hospitality they had been enjoying. Possessing a daughter, for
whom Quirk must naturally have wished to make so splendid a match as
that with Titmouse--but who was plainly engaged to Mr. Gammon--how kind
and disinterested was Mr. Quirk, in affording every encouragement in his
power to the passion which Titmouse had so manifestly conceived for Miss
Tag-rag! And was there ever so delightful a person as Gammon? How
cordially he had shaken the hands of each of them at parting! As for
Miss Tag-rag, she felt that if her heart had not been so deeply engaged
to Titmouse, she could have loved Mr. Gammon!

"I hope, Tabby," said Mrs. Tag-rag, with subdued excitement, as they
rattled homeward, "that when you're Mrs. Titmouse, you'll bring your
dear husband to hear Mr. Horror? You know, we ought to be grateful to
the Lord--for He has done it!"

"La, ma, how can I tell?" quoth Miss Tag-rag, petulantly. "I must go
where Mr. Titmouse chooses, of course; and no doubt he'll take sittings
in one of the West End churches; you know, _you_ go where _pa_ goes--_I_
go where Titmouse goes! But I _will_ come sometimes, too--if it's only
to show that I'm not above it, you know. La, what a stir there will be!
The three Miss Knipps--I do so hope they'll be there! I'll have your
pew, ma, lined with red velvet; it will look so genteel."

"I'm not quite so sure, Tabby, though," interrupted her father, with a
certain swell of manner, "that we shall, after a certain event, continue
to live in these parts. There's such a thing as retiring from business,
Tabby; besides, we shall nat'rally wish to be near you!"

"He's a _love_ of a man, pa, isn't he?" interrupted Miss Tag-rag, with
irrepressible excitement. Her father folded her in his arms. They could
hardly believe that they had reached Satin Lodge. That respectable
structure, somehow or other, now looked to the eyes of all of them
shrunk into most contemptible dimensions; and they quite turned up their
noses, involuntarily, on entering the little passage. What was it to the
spacious and splendid residence which they had quitted? And what, in all
probability, could _that_ be to the mansion--or any one, perhaps, of the
several mansions--to which Mr. Titmouse would be presently entitled,
and--in his right--some one else?

Miss Tag-rag said her prayers that evening very briefly--pausing for an
instant to consider, whether she might in plain terms pray that she
might soon become Mrs. Titmouse; but the bare thought of such an event
so excited her, that in a sort of confused whirl of delightful feeling,
she suddenly jumped into bed, and slept scarce a wink all night long.
Mr. and Mrs. Tag-rag talked together very fast for nearly a couple of
hours, sleep long fleeing from the eyes dazzled with so splendid a
vision as that which had floated before them all day. At length Mr.
Tag-rag, getting tired sooner than his wife, became very sullen, and
silent; and on her venturing--after a few minutes' pause--to mention
some new idea which had occurred to her, he told her furiously to "hold
her tongue, and let him go to sleep!" She obeyed him, and lay awake till
it was broad daylight. About eight o'clock, Tag-rag, who had overslept
himself, rudely roused her--imperiously telling her to "go down
immediately and see about breakfast;" then he knocked gently at his
daughter's door; and on her asking who it was, said in a fond way--"How
are you, Mrs. T.?"




CHAPTER IV.


While the brilliant success of Tittlebat Titmouse was exciting so great
a sensation among the inmates of Satin Lodge and Alibi House, there were
also certain quarters in the upper regions of society, in which it
produced a considerable commotion, and where it was contemplated with
feelings of intense interest; nor without reason. For indeed to you,
reflecting reader, much pondering men and manners, and observing the
influence of great wealth, especially when suddenly and unexpectedly
acquired, upon all classes of mankind--it would appear passing strange
that so prodigious an event as that of an accession to a fortune of ten
thousand a-year, and a large accumulation of money besides, could be
looked on with indifference in those regions where MONEY

    "Is like the air they breathe--if they have it not they die;"

in whose absence, all their "honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,"
disappear like snow under sunshine; the edifice of pomp, luxury, and
magnificence that "rose like an exhalation," so disappears--

    "And, like an insubstantial pageant faded,
    Leaves not a rack behind."

_Take away money_, and that which raised its delicate and pampered
possessors above the common condition of mankind--that of privation and
incessant labor and anxiety--into one entirely artificial, engendering
totally new wants and desires, is gone, all gone; and its occupants
suddenly fall, as it were, through a highly rarefied atmosphere,
breathless and dismayed, into contact with the chilling exigencies of
life, of which till then they had only heard and read, sometimes with a
kind of morbid sympathy; as we hear and read of a foreign country, not
stirring the while from our snug homes, by whose comfortable and
luxurious firesides we read of the frightful palsying cold of the polar
regions, and for a moment sigh over and shudder at the condition of
their miserable inhabitants, as vividly pictured to us by adventurous
travellers.

If the reader had reverently cast his eye over the pages of that
glittering centre of aristocratic literature, and inexhaustible solace
against the _ennui_ of a wet day--I mean _Debrett's Peerage_, his
attention could not have failed to be riveted, among a galaxy of
brilliant but minor stars, by the radiance of one transcendent
constellation.

                    Behold; hush; tremble!

     "AUGUSTUS MORTIMER PLANTAGENET FITZ-URSE, EARL OF DREDDLINGTON,
     VISCOUNT FITZ-URSE, AND BARON DRELINCOURT; KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN
     FLEECE; G. C. B., D. C. L., F. C. S., F. P. S., &c., &c., &c.;
     Lieutenant-General in the army, Colonel of the 37th regiment of
     light dragoons; Lord Lieutenant of ----shire; elder brother of the
     Trinity House; formerly Lord Steward of the Household; born the
     31st of March, 17--; succeeded his father, PERCY CONSTANTINE
     FITZ-URSE, as fifth Earl, and twentieth in the Barony, January
     10th, 17--; married, April 1, 17--, the Right Hon. Lady Philippa
     Emmeline Blanche Macspleuchan, daughter of Archibald, ninth Duke of
     Tantallan, K. T., and has issue an only child,

     "CECILIA PHILIPPA LEOPOLDINA PLANTAGENET, born June 10, 17--.

     "Town residence, Grosvenor Square.

     "Seats, Gruneaghoolaghan Castle, Galway; Tre-ardevoraeor Manor,
     Cornwall; Llmryllwcrwpllglly Abbey, N. Wales; Tully-clachanach
     Palace, N. Britain; Poppleton Hall, Hertfordshire.

     "Earldom, by patent, 1667; ---- Barony, by writ of summons,
     12th Hen. II."

Now, as to the above tremendous list of seats and residences, be it
observed that the existence of two of them, viz. Grosvenor Square and
Poppleton Hall, was tolerably well ascertained by the residence of the
august proprietor of them, and the expenditure therein of his princely
revenue of £5,000 a-year. The existence of the remaining ones, however,
the names of which the diligent chronicler has preserved with such
scrupulous accuracy, had become somewhat problematical since the era of
the civil wars, and the physical derangement of the surface of the earth
in those parts, which one may conceive to have taken place[11]
consequent upon those events; those imposing feudal residences having
been originally erected in positions so carefully selected with a view
to their security against aggression, as to have become totally
inaccessible--and indeed unknown, to the present inglorious and
degenerate race, no longer animated by the spirit of chivalry and
adventure.

[I have now recovered my breath, after my bold flight into the
resplendent regions of aristocracy; but my eyes are still dazzled.]

The reader may by this time have got an intimation that Tittlebat
Titmouse, in a madder freak of Fortune than any which her
incomprehensible Ladyship hath hitherto exhibited in the pages of this
history, is far on his way towards a dizzy pitch of elevation,--viz.
that he has now, owing to the verdict of the Yorkshire jury, taken the
place of Mr. Aubrey, and become heir-expectant to the oldest barony in
the kingdom--between it and him only one old peer, and his sole child,
an unmarried daughter, intervening. Behold the thing demonstrated to
your very eye, in the Pedigree on the next page, which is only our
former one[12] a little extended.

                            Geoffrey de Drelincourt
                    Summoned as Baron, _by writ_, 12 Hen. II.
                                      .
                          From him    .   descend
                                      .
                   Henry Dreddlington, sixteenth Baron by writ,
                       created Earl of Dreddlington, 1667.
                                        |
         _______________________________|
        |                          |
        |                          |
     Charles              Percy Dreddlington,
  (17th Baron                 _of Yatton_,
  and 2d Earl)        (younger brother of Charles)
        |                          |
        |              ____________|____________
     Geoffrey         |                         |
  (18th Baron         |                         |
  and 3d Earl)      Harry                    Charles
        |        Dreddlington              Dreddlington
        |                                       |
      Percy                                     |
  (19th Baron                        ___________|______________
  and 4th Earl)                     |                          |
        |                           |                          |
        |                        Stephen                    Geoffrey
     AUGUSTUS                  Dreddlington               Dreddlington
  (20th Baron and           (eldest brother)==            (2d brother)
     5th Earl)                      |                          |
        |                           |                          |
        |        _Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse_==d^r       _Aubrey_==d^r
        |____                and sole heiress            and sole heiress
             |                      |                          |
             |                      |                          |
       LADY CECILIA        Gabriel T. Titmouse           Charles Aubrey
       (only child)                 |                          |
                                    |                          |
                            TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE           CHARLES AUBREY
                              (only child)              (eldest son and
                                                          heir-at-law)

From this I think it will appear, that on the death of Augustus, fifth
earl and twentieth baron, with no other issue than Lady Cecilia, the
earldom being then extinct, the barony would descend upon the Lady
Cecilia; and that, in the event of her dying without issue in the
lifetime of her father, Tittlebat Titmouse would, on the earl's death
without other lawful issue, become LORD DRELINCOURT, twenty-_first_ in
the barony! and in the event of her dying without issue, after her
father's death, TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE would become the twenty-_second_ LORD
DRELINCOURT; one or other of which two splendid positions, but for the
enterprising agency of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, would have been
occupied by CHARLES AUBREY, ESQ.;--on considering all which, one cannot
but remember a saying of an ancient poet, who seems to have kept as keen
an eye upon the unaccountable frolics of the goddess Fortune, as this
history shows that I have. 'Tis a passage which any little schoolboy
will translate to his mother or his sisters--

        ----"Hinc apicem rapax
    Fortuna cum stridore acuto
    Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet."[13]

At the time of which I am writing, the Earl of Dreddlington was about
sixty-seven years old; and he would have realized the idea of an
incarnation of the sublimest PRIDE. He was of rather a slight make, and,
though of a tolerably advanced age, stood as straight as an arrow. His
hair was glossy, and white as snow: his features were of an aristocratic
cast; their expression was severe and haughty; and I am compelled to say
that there was scarce a trace of intellect perceptible in them. His
manner and demeanor were cold, imperturbable, inaccessible; wherever he
went--so to speak--he radiated cold. Comparative poverty had embittered
his spirit, as his lofty birth and ancient descent had generated the
pride I have spoken of. With what calm and supreme self-satisfaction did
he look down upon all lower in the peerage than himself! And as for a
newly-created peer, he looked at such a being with ineffable disdain.
Among his few equals he was affable enough; and among his inferiors he
exhibited an insupportable appearance of condescension--one which
excited a wise man's smile of pity and contempt, and a fool's
anger--both, however, equally nought to the Earl of Dreddlington!--If
any one could have ventured upon a _post mortem_ examination of so
august a structure as the earl's carcass, his heart would probably have
been found to be of the size of a pea, and his brain very soft and
flabby; both, however, equal to the small occasions which, from time to
time, called for the exercise of their functions. The former was
occupied almost exclusively by two feelings--love of himself and of his
daughter, (because upon her would descend his barony;) the latter
exhibited its powers (supposing the brain to be the seat of the mind) in
mastering the military details requisite for nominal soldiership; the
game of whist; the routine of petty business in the House of Lords; and
the etiquette of the court. One branch of useful knowledge by the way he
had, however, completely mastered--that which is so ably condensed in
_Debrett_; and he became a sort of oracle in such matters. As for his
politics, he professed Whig principles--and was, indeed, a bitter though
quiet partisan. In attendance to his senatorial duties, he practised an
exemplary punctuality; was always to be found in the House at its
sitting and rising; and never once, on any occasion, great or small,
voted against his party. He had never been heard to speak in a full
House; first, because he never could summon nerve enough for the
purpose; secondly, because he never had anything to say; and lastly,
lest he should compromise his dignity, and destroy the _prestige_ of
his position, by not speaking better than any one present. His services
were not, however, entirely overlooked; for, on his party coming into
office for a few weeks, (they knew it could be for no longer a time,)
they made him Lord Steward of the Household; which was thenceforward an
epoch to which he referred every event of his life, great and small. The
great object of his ambition, ever since he had been of an age to form
large and comprehensive views of action and conduct, to conceive
superior designs, and to achieve distinction among mankind--was, to
obtain a step in the peerage; for considering the antiquity of his
family, and his ample, nay, _superfluous_ pecuniary means--so much more
than adequate to support his present double dignity of earl and
baron--he thought it but a reasonable return for his eminent political
services, to confer upon him the honor which he coveted. But his anxiety
on this point had been recently increased a thousand-fold by one
circumstance. A gentleman who held an honorable and lucrative official
situation in the House of Lords, and who never had treated the Earl of
Dreddlington with that profound obsequiousness which the earl conceived
to be his due--but, on the contrary, had presumed to consider himself a
man, and an Englishman, equally with the earl--had, a short time before,
succeeded in establishing his title to an earldom which had long been
dormant, and was, alas, of creation earlier than that of Dreddlington.
The Earl of Dreddlington took this untoward circumstance so much to
heart, that for some months afterwards he appeared to be in a decline;
always experiencing a dreadful inward spasm whenever the Earl of
Fitzwalter made his appearance in the House. For this sad state of
things there was plainly but one remedy--a MARQUISATE--at which the earl
gazed with the wistful eye of an old and feeble ape at a cocoa-nut, just
above his reach, and which he beholds at length grasped and carried off
by some nimbler and younger rival.

Among all the weighty cares and anxieties of this life, however, I must
do the earl the justice to say, that he did not neglect the concerns of
hereafter--the solemn realities of that Future revealed to us in the
Scriptures. To his enlightened and comprehensive view of the state of
things around him, it was evident that the Author of the world had
decreed the existence of regular gradations of society. The following
lines, quoted one night in the House by the leader of his party, had
infinitely delighted the earl--

      "Oh, where DEGREE is shaken,
    Which is the ladder to all high designs,
    The enterprise is sick!
    Take but DEGREE away--untune that string,
    And, hark! what discord follows! each thing meets,
    In mere oppugnancy!"[14]

When the earl discovered that this was the production of Shakespeare he
conceived a great respect for that writer, and purchased a copy of his
works, and had them splendidly bound. They were fated never to be
opened, however, except at that one place where the famous passage in
question was to be found. How great was the honor thus conferred upon
the plebeian poet, to stand amid a collection of royal and noble
authors, to whose productions, and those in elucidation and praise of
them, the earl's splendid-looking library had till then been
confined!--Since, thought the earl, such is clearly the order of
Providence in this world, why should it not be so in the next? He felt
certain that then there would be found corresponding differences and
degrees, in analogy to the differences and degrees existing upon earth;
and with this view had read and endeavored to comprehend the first page
or two of a very dry but learned book--Butler's _Analogy_--lent him by a
deceased kinsman--a bishop. This consolatory conclusion of the earl's
was greatly strengthened by a passage of Scripture, from which he had
once heard the aforesaid bishop preach--"_In my Father's house are_ MANY
MANSIONS; _if it had not been so, I would have told you_." On grounds
such as these, after much conversation with several old brother peers of
his own rank, he and they--those wise and good men--came to the
conclusion that there was no real ground for apprehending so grievous a
misfortune as the huddling together hereafter of the great and small
into one miscellaneous and ill-assorted assemblage; but that the rules
of precedence, in all their strictness, as being founded in the nature
of things, would meet with an exact observance, so that every one should
be ultimately and eternally happy--in the company of his equals. The
Earl of Dreddlington would have, in fact, as soon supposed, with the
deluded Indian, that in his voyage to the next world--

    "His faithful dog should bear him company;"

as that his Lordship should be doomed to participate the same regions of
heaven with any of his domestics; unless, indeed, by some, in his view,
not improbable dispensation, it should form an ingredient in their cup
of happiness in the next world, there to perform those offices--or
analogous ones--for their old masters, which they had performed upon
earth. As the earl grew older, these just, and rational, and Scriptural
views, became clearer, and his faith firmer. Indeed, it might be said
that he was in a manner ripening for immortality--for which his noble
and lofty nature, he secretly felt, was fitter, and more likely to be in
its element, than it could possibly be in this dull, degraded, and
confused world. He knew that there his sufferings in this inferior
stage of existence would be richly recompensed,--for sufferings indeed
he had, though secret, arising from the scanty means which had been
allotted to him for the purpose of maintaining the exalted rank to which
it had pleased God to call him. The long series of exquisite
mortifications and pinching privations arising from this inadequacy of
means, had, however, the earl doubted not, been designed by Providence
as a trial of his constancy, and from which he would, in due time, issue
like thrice-refined gold. Then also would doubtless be remembered in his
favor the innumerable instances of his condescension in mingling, in the
most open and courteous manner, with those who were unquestionably his
inferiors, sacrificing his own feelings of lofty and fastidious
exclusiveness, and endeavoring to advance the interests, and as far as
influence and example went, polish and refine the manners of the lower
orders of society. Such is an outline--alas, how faint and
imperfect!--of the character of this great and good man, the Earl of
Dreddlington. As for his domestic and family circumstances, he had been
a widower for some fifteen years, his countess having brought him but
one child, Lady Cecilia Philippa Leopoldina Plantagenet, who was, in
almost all respects, the counterpart of her illustrious father. She
resembled him not a little in feature, only that she partook of the
plainness of her mother. Her complexion was delicately fair; but her
features had no other expression than that of a languid hauteur. Her
upper eyelids drooped as if she could hardly keep them open; the upper
jaw projected considerably over the under one; and her front teeth were
prominent and exposed. Frigid and inanimate, she seemed to take but
little interest in anything on earth. In person, she was of average
height, of slender and well-proportioned figure, and an erect and
graceful carriage, only that she had a habit of throwing her head a
little backward, which gave her a singularly disdainful appearance. She
had reached her twenty-seventh year without having had an eligible offer
of marriage, though she would be the possessor of a barony in her own
right, and £5,000 a-year; a circumstance which, it may be believed, not
a little embittered her. She inherited her father's pride in all its
plenitude. You should have seen the haughty couple sitting silently side
by side in the old-fashioned yellow family chariot, as they drove round
the crowded park, returning the salutations of those they met in the
slightest manner possible! A glimpse of them at such a moment would have
given you a far more just and lively notion of their real character,
than the most anxious and labored description of mine.

Ever since the first Earl of Dreddlington had, through a bitter pique
conceived against his eldest son, the second earl, diverted the
principal family revenues to the younger branch, leaving the title to be
supported by only £5,000 a-year, there had been a complete estrangement
between the elder and the younger--the titled and the moneyed--branches
of the family. On Mr. Aubrey's attaining his majority, however, the
present earl sanctioned overtures being made towards a reconciliation,
being of opinion that Mr. Aubrey and Lady Cecilia might, by
intermarriage, effect a happy reunion of family interests; an object,
this, which had long lain nearer his heart than any other upon earth,
till, in fact, it became a kind of passion. Actuated by such
considerations, he had done more to conciliate Mr. Aubrey than he had
ever done towards any one on earth. It was, however, in vain. Mr.
Aubrey's first delinquency was an unqualified adoption of Tory
principles. Now all the Dreddlingtons, from time whereof the memory of
man runneth not to the contrary, had been firm unflinching Tories, till
the distinguished father of the present earl quietly walked over, one
day, to the other side of the House of Lords, completely fascinated by
a bit of ribbon which the minister held up before him; and ere he had
sat in that wonder-working region, the ministerial side of the House,
twenty-four hours, he discovered that the true signification of Tory,
was _bigot_--and of Whig, _patriot_; and he stuck to that version till
it transformed him into a GOLD STICK, in which capacity he died; having
repeatedly and solemnly impressed upon his son, the necessity and
advantage of taking the same view of public affairs, that so he might
arrive at similar results. And in the _way_ in which he had been
_trained up_, most religiously had gone the earl; and see the result:
he, also, had attained to eminent and responsible office--to wit, that
of Lord Steward of the Household. Now, things standing thus--how could
the earl so compromise his principles, and indirectly injure his party,
as by suffering his daughter to marry a Tory? Great grief and vexation
of spirit did _this_ matter, therefore, occasion to that excellent
nobleman. But, secondly, Aubrey not only declined to marry his cousin,
but clinched his refusal, and sealed his final exclusion from the
dawning good opinion and affections of the earl, by marrying, as hath
been seen, some one else--Miss St. Clair. Thenceforth there was a great
gulf between the Earl of Dreddlington and the Aubreys. Whenever they
happened to meet, the earl greeted him with an elaborate bow, and a
petrifying smile; but for the last seven years not one syllable had
passed between them. As for Mr. Aubrey, he had never been otherwise than
amused at the eccentric airs of his magnificent kinsman.--Now, was it
not a hard thing for the earl to bear--namely, the prospect there was
that his barony and estates might devolve upon this same Aubrey, or his
issue? for Lady Cecilia, alas! enjoyed but precarious health, and her
chances of marrying seemed daily diminishing. This was a thorn in the
poor earl's flesh; a source of constant _worry_ to him, sleeping and
waking; and proud as he was, and with such good reason, he would have
gone down on his knees and prayed to Heaven to avert so direful a
calamity--to see his daughter married--and with a prospect of
perpetuating upon the earth the sublime race of the Dreddlingtons.

Such being the relative position of Mr. Aubrey, and the Earl of
Dreddlington, at the time when this history opens, it is easy for the
reader to imagine the lively interest with which the earl first heard of
the tidings that a stranger had set up a title to the whole of the
Yatton estates; and the silent but profound anxiety with which he
continued to regard the progress of the affair. He obtained, from time
to time, by means of confidential inquiries instituted by his solicitor,
a general notion of the nature of the new claimant's pretensions; but
with a due degree of delicacy towards his unfortunate kinsman, his
Lordship studiously concealed the interest he felt in so important a
family question as the succession to the Yatton property. The earl and
his daughter were exceedingly anxious to _see_ the claimant; and when he
heard that that claimant was a gentleman of "decided Whig
principles"--the earl was very near setting it down as a sort of special
interference of Providence in his favor; and one that, in the natural
order of things, would lead to the accomplishment of his other wishes.
Who could say that, before a twelvemonth had passed over, the two
branches of the family might not be in a fair way of being reunited? And
that thus, among other incidents, the earl would be invested with the
virtual patronage of the borough of Yatton, and, in the event of their
return to power, his claim upon his party for his long-coveted
marquisate rendered irresistible? He had gone to the Continent shortly
before the trial of the ejectment at York; and did not return till a day
or two after the Court of King's Bench had solemnly declared the
validity of the plaintiff's title to the Yatton property, and
consequently established his contingent right of succession to the
barony of Drelincourt. Of this event a lengthened account was given in
one of the Yorkshire papers which fell under the earl's eye the day
after his arrival from abroad; and to the report of the decision of the
question of law, was appended the following paragraph:--

     "In consequence of the above decision, Mr. Aubrey, we are able to
     state on the best authority, has given formal notice of his
     intention to surrender the entire of the Yatton property without
     further litigation; thus making the promptest amends in his power
     to those whom he has--we cannot doubt unwittingly--injured. He has
     also accepted the Chiltern Hundreds, and has consequently retired
     from Parliament; so that the borough of Yatton is now vacant. We
     sincerely hope that the new proprietor of Yatton will either
     himself sit for the borough, and announce immediately his intention
     of doing so, or give his prompt and decisive support to some
     gentleman of decided Whig principles. We say _prompt_--for the
     enemy is vigilant and crafty. Men of Yatton! To the rescue!!!--Mr.
     Titmouse is now, we believe, in London. This fortunate gentleman is
     not only at this moment in possession of the fine property at
     Yatton, with an unencumbered rent-roll of from twelve to fifteen
     thousand a-year, and a vast accumulation of rents to be handed over
     by the late possessor, but is now next but one in succession to the
     earldom of Dreddlington and barony of Drelincourt, with the large
     family estates annexed thereto. We believe this is the oldest
     barony in the kingdom. It must be a source of great gratification
     to the present earl, to know that his probable successor professes
     the same liberal and enlightened political opinions, of which his
     Lordship has, during his long and distinguished public life, been
     so able, consistent, and uncompromising a supporter."

The Earl of Dreddlington was not a little flustered on seeing the above
paragraph; which he read over half a dozen times with increasing
excitement. The time had at length arrived for him to take decisive
steps; nay, duty to his newly-discovered kinsman required it.

Messrs. Titmouse and Gammon were walking arm-in-arm down Oxford Street,
on their return from some livery-stables, where they had been looking at
a horse which Titmouse was thinking of purchasing, when an incident
occurred which ruffled him not a little. He had been recognized and
publicly accosted by a vulgar fellow, with a yard-measure in his hand,
and a large parcel of drapery under his arm--in fact, by our old friend
Mr. Huckaback. In vain did Mr. Titmouse affect, for some time, not to
see his old acquaintance, and to be earnestly engaged in conversation
with Mr. Gammon.

"Ah, Titty!--Titmouse! Well, then--_Mister_ Titmouse--how are
you?--Devilish long time since we met!" Titmouse directed a look at him
which he wished could have blighted him, and quickened his pace without
taking any further notice of the presumptuous intruder. Huckaback's
blood was up, however--roused by this ungrateful and insolent treatment
from one who had been under such great obligations to him; and
quickening _his_ pace also, he kept alongside with Titmouse.

"Ah," continued Huckaback, "why do you cut me in this way, Titty? You
_aren't_ ashamed of me surely? Many's the time you've tramped up and
down Oxford Street with your bundle and yard-measure"----

"Fellow!" at length exclaimed Titmouse, indignantly, "'pon my life I'll
give you in charge if you go on so! Be off, you low fellow!--Dem vulgar
brute!" he subjoined in a lower tone, bursting into perspiration, for he
had not forgotten the insolent pertinacity of Huckaback's disposition.

"My eyes! Give me in charge? Come, I like that, rather--you vagabond!
Pay me what you owe me! You're a swindler! You owe me fifty pounds, you
do! You sent a man to rob me!"

"Will any one get a constable!" inquired Titmouse, who had grown as
white as death. The little crowd that was collecting round them began to
suspect, from Titmouse's agitated appearance, that there must be some
foundation for the charges made against him.

"Oh, go, get a constable! Nothing I should like better! Ah, my fine
gentleman--what's the time of day when chaps like you are wound up so
high?"

Gammon's interference was in vain. Huckaback got more abusive and noisy;
no constable was at hand; so, to escape the intolerable interruption and
nuisance, he beckoned a coach off the stand, which was close by; and,
Titmouse and he stepping into it, they were soon out of sight and
hearing of Mr. Huckaback. Having taken a shilling drive, they alighted,
and walked towards Covent Garden. As they approached the hotel, they
observed a yellow chariot, at once elegant and somewhat old-fashioned,
rolling away from the door.

"I wonder who that is," said Gammon; "it's an earl's coronet on the
panel; and a white-haired old gentleman was sitting low down in the
corner"----

"Ah--it's no doubt a fine thing to be a lord, and all that--but I'll
answer for it, some of 'em's as poor as a church mouse," replied
Titmouse as they entered the hotel. At that moment the waiter, with a
most profound bow, presented him with a letter and a card, which had
only the moment before been left for him. The card was thus:

        +-------------------------------+
        |                               |
        |   THE EARL OF DREDDLINGTON.   |
        |                               |
        |                               |
        | GROSVENOR SQUARE.             |
        |                               |
        +-------------------------------+

and there was written on it, in pencil, in rather a feeble and hurried
character--"For Mr. Titmouse."

"My stars, Mr. Gammon!" exclaimed Titmouse, excitedly, addressing Mr.
Gammon, who also seemed greatly interested by the occurrence. They both
repaired to a vacant table at the extremity of the room; and Titmouse,
with not a little trepidation, hastily breaking a large seal which bore
the earl's family arms, with their crowded quarterings and grim
supporters--better appreciated by Gammon, however, than by
Titmouse--opened the ample envelope, and, unfolding its thick gilt-edged
enclosure, read as follows:--

     "The Earl of Dreddlington has the honor of waiting upon Mr.
     Titmouse, in whom he is very happy to have, though unexpectedly,
     discovered so near a kinsman. On the event which has brought this
     to pass, the earl congratulates himself not less than Mr. Titmouse,
     and hopes for the earliest opportunity of a personal introduction.

     "The earl leaves town to-day and will not return till Monday next,
     on which day he begs the honor of Mr. Titmouse's company to dinner,
     at six o'clock. He may depend upon its being strictly a family
     _reunion_; the only person present, besides Mr. Titmouse and the
     earl, being the Lady Cecilia.

             "Grosvenor Square, Thursday.
         "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQ., &c. &c."

As soon as Titmouse had read the above, still holding it in his hand, he
gazed at Gammon with mute apprehension and delight. Of the existence,
indeed, of the magnificent personage who had just introduced himself,
Titmouse had certainly heard, from time to time, since the commencement
of the proceedings which had just been so successfully terminated. He
had seen the brightness, to be sure; but, as a sort of remote splendor,
like that of a fixed star which gleamed brightly, but at too vast a
distance to have any sensible influence, or even to arrest his
attention. After a little while, Titmouse began to chatter very volubly;
but Gammon, after reading over the note once or twice, seemed not much
inclined for conversation: and, had Titmouse been accustomed to
observation, he might have gathered, from the eye and brow of Gammon,
that that gentleman's mind was very deeply occupied by some matter or
other, probably suggested by the incident which had just taken place.
Titmouse, by-and-by, called for pens, ink, and paper--"the very best
gilt-edged paper, mind"--and prepared to reply to Lord Dreddlington's
invitation. Gammon, however, who knew the peculiarities of his friend's
style of correspondence, suggested that _he_ should draw up, and
Titmouse copy the following note. This was presently done; but when
Gammon observed how thickly studded it was with capital letters, the
numerous flourishes with which it was garnished, and its more than
questionable orthography, he prevailed on Titmouse, after some little
difficulty, to allow him to transcribe the note which was to be sent to
Lord Dreddlington. Here is a copy of that courteous document:--

     "Mr. Titmouse begs to present his compliments to the Earl of
     Dreddlington, and to express the high sense he entertains of the
     kind consideration evinced by his Lordship in his call and note of
     to-day.

     "One of the most gratifying circumstances connected with Mr.
     Titmouse's recent success, is the distinguished alliance which his
     Lordship has been so prompt and courteous in recognizing. Mr.
     Titmouse will feel the greatest pleasure in availing himself of the
     Earl of Dreddlington's invitation to dinner for Monday next.

         "Cabbage-Stalk Hotel, Thursday.
       "The Right Honble. the EARL OF DREDDLINGTON, &c., &c."

"Have you a 'Peerage' here, waiter?" inquired Gammon, as the waiter
brought him a lighted taper. _Debrett_ was shortly laid before him; and
turning to the name of Dreddlington, he read over the paragraph which
had been already laid before the reader. "Humph--_'Lady Cecilia'_--here
she is--his _daughter_--I thought as much--I see!" This was what passed
through his mind, as--having left Titmouse, who set off to deposit a
card and the above "Answer" at Lord Dreddlington's--he made his way
towards the delectable regions in which their office was
situated--Saffron Hill. "'Tis curious--amusing--interesting, to observe
the social progress of this charming little fellow"--continued Gammon to
himself--

"_Tag-rag_--and his daughter;

"_Quirk_--and his daughter;

"_The Earl of Dreddlington_--and his daughter. How many more? Happy!
happy! happy Titmouse!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun which was rising upon Titmouse was setting upon the Aubreys.
Dear, delightful--now too dear, now too delightful--Yatton! the shades
of evening are descending upon thee, and thy virtuous but afflicted
occupants, who, early on the morrow, quit thee forever. Approach
silently you conservatory. Behold, in the midst of it, the dark slight
figure of a lady, solitary, motionless, in melancholy attitude--her
hands clasped before her: it is Miss Aubrey. Her face is beautiful, but
grief is in her eye; and her bosom heaves with sighs, which, gentle
though they be, are yet the only sounds audible. Yes, that is the sweet
and once joyous Kate Aubrey!

'Twas she indeed; and this was her last visit to her conservatory. Many
rare, delicate, and beautiful flowers were there. The air was laden with
the fragrant odors which they exhaled, as it were in sighs, on account
of the dreaded departure of their lovely mistress. At length she
stooped down, and, in stooping, a tear fell right upon the small sprig
of geranium which she gently detached from its stem, and placed in her
bosom. "Sweet flowers," thought she, "who will tend you as I have tended
you, when I am gone? Why do you look now more beautiful than ever you
did before?"--Her eye presently fell upon the spot on which, till the
day before, had stood her aviary. Poor Kate had sent it, as a present,
to Lady De la Zouch, and it was then at Fotheringham Castle. What a
flutter there used to be among the beautiful little creatures, when they
perceived Kate's approach! She turned her head away. She felt oppressed,
and attributed it to the closeness of the conservatory--the strength of
the odors given out by the numerous flowers; but it was sorrow that
oppressed her; and she was in a state at once of mental excitement and
physical exhaustion. The last few weeks had been an interval of
exquisite suffering. She could not be happy alone, nor yet bear the
company of her brother and sister-in-law, or their innocent and lovely
children. Quitting the conservatory with a look of lingering fondness,
she passed along into the house with a hurried step, and escaped,
unobserved, to her chamber--the very chamber in which the reader
obtained his first distant and shadowy glimpse of her; and in which, now
entering it silently and suddenly, the door being only closed, not shut,
she observed her faithful little maid Harriet, sitting in tears before a
melancholy heap of packages prepared for travelling on the morrow. She
rose as Miss Aubrey entered, and presently exclaimed passionately,
bursting afresh into tears, "Ma'am, I _can't_ leave you--indeed I can't!
I know all your ways; I won't go to any one else! I shall hate service!
and I know they'll hate _me_ too; for I shall cry myself to death!"

"Come, come, Harriet," faltered Miss Aubrey, "this is very foolish;
nay, it is unkind to distress me in this manner at the last moment."

"Oh, ma'am, if you _did_ but know how I love you! How I'd go on my knees
to serve you all the rest of the days of my life!"

"Don't talk in that way, Harriet; that's a good girl," said Miss Aubrey,
rather faintly, and, sinking into the chair, she buried her face in her
handkerchief, "you know I've had a great deal to go through, Harriet,
and am in very poor spirits."

"I know it, ma'am, I do; and that's why I can't _bear_ to leave you!"
She sank on her knees beside Miss Aubrey. "Oh, ma'am, if you would but
let me stay with you! I've been trying, ever since you first told me, to
make up my mind to part with you, and, now it's coming to the time, I
_can't_, ma'am--indeed, I can't! If you did but know, ma'am, what my
thoughts have been, while I've been folding and packing up your dresses
here! To think that I sha'n't be with you to unpack them! It's very
hard, ma'am, that Madam's maid is to go with her, and I'm not to go with
_you_!"

"We were obliged to make a choice, Harriet," said Miss Aubrey, with
forced calmness.

"Yes, ma'am; but why didn't you choose us both? Because we've both
always done our best; and, as for me, you've never spoke an unkind word
to me in your life"----

"Harriet, Harriet," said Miss Aubrey, tremulously, "I've several times
explained to you that we cannot any longer afford each to have our own
maid; and Mrs. Aubrey's maid is older than you, and knows how to manage
children"----

"What signifies _affording_, ma'am? Neither she nor I will ever take a
shilling of wages; I'd really rather serve you for nothing, ma'am, than
any other lady for a hundred pounds a-year! Oh, so happy as I've been
in your service, ma'am!" she added hastily, and burst into an agony of
weeping.

"Don't, Harriet!--You would not, if you knew the pain you give me," said
Miss Aubrey, faintly. Harriet perceived Miss Aubrey's ill-concealed
agitation; and starting aside, poured out a glass of water, and forced
her pale mistress to swallow a little, which presently revived her.

"Harriet," said she, feebly, but firmly, "you have never once disobeyed
me, and _now_ I am certain that you will not. I assure you that we have
made all our arrangements, and cannot alter them. I have been very
fortunate in obtaining for you so kind a mistress as Lady Stratton.
Remember, Harriet, she was the oldest bosom friend of my"----Miss
Aubrey's voice trembled, and she ceased speaking for a minute or two,
during which she struggled against her feelings with momentary success.
"Here's the prayer-book," she presently resumed, opening a drawer in her
dressing-table, and taking out a small volume--"Here's the prayer-book I
promised you; it is very prettily bound, and I have written your name in
it, Harriet, as you desired. Take it, and keep it for my sake. Will
you?"

"Oh, ma'am," replied the girl, bitterly, "I shall never bear to look at
it! And yet I'll never part with it till I die!"

"Now leave me, Harriet, for a short time--I wish to be alone," said Miss
Aubrey; and she was obeyed. She presently rose and bolted the door; and
then, secure from interruption, walked slowly to and fro for some time;
and a long and deep current of melancholy thoughts and feelings
flowed through her mind and heart. She had but a short time before
seen her sister's sweet children put into their little beds for
the last time at Yatton; and together with their mother, had hung
fondly over them, kissing and embracing them--their destined little
fellow-wanderers--till her feelings compelled her to leave them. One by
one, all the dear innumerable ties which had attached her to Yatton, and
to everything connected with it, ever since her birth, had been severed
and broken--ties, not only the strength, but very existence of which,
she had scarce been aware of, till then. She had bade--as had all of
them--repeated and agonizing farewells to very dear and old friends. Her
heart trembled as she gazed at the objects familiar to her eye, and
pregnant with innumerable little softening associations, ever since her
infancy. Nothing around them now belonged to _them_--but to a
stranger--to one who--she shuddered with disgust. She thought of the
fearful position in which her brother was placed--entirely at the mercy
of, it might be, selfish and rapacious men--what indeed was to become of
all of them? At length she threw herself into the large old easy-chair
which stood near the window, and with a fluttering heart and hasty
tremulous hand, drew an open letter from her bosom. She held it for some
moments, as if dreading again to peruse it--but at length unfolded and
read a portion of it. 'Twas full of fervent and at the same time
delicate expressions of fondness; and after a short while, her hand
dropped, with the letter, upon her lap, and she burst into a passionate
flood of tears. After an interval of several minutes, she again took up
the letter--read a little farther--still more and more moved by the
generous and noble sentiments it contained--and at length, utterly
overcome, she again dropped her hand, and sobbed aloud long and
vehemently. "It cannot--cannot--no, it _cannot_ be," she murmured; and,
yielding to her feelings for a long while, her tears showered down her
pallid, beautiful cheeks.

At length, having resumed her perusal of the letter, she came to the
conclusion. In a kind of agony she pressed the signature to her lips;
and then hastily folding up the letter, replaced it whence she had taken
it, and continued sobbing bitterly. Alas, what additional poignancy did
this give to the agonies of her last evening at Yatton! She had,
however, become somewhat calmer by the time that she heard the door
hastily, but gently tapped at, and then attempted to be opened. Miss
Aubrey rose and unbolted it, and Mrs. Aubrey entered, her beautiful
countenance as pale and sad as that of her sister-in-law. The former,
however, was both wife and mother; and the various cares which these
relations had entailed upon her, at a bitter moment like the present,
served in some measure to occupy her thoughts, and prevent her from
being absorbed by the heart-breaking circumstances which surrounded her.
Suffering had, however, a little impaired her beauty; her cheek was very
pale, and her eye and brow were laden with trouble.

"Kate, dear Kate," said she, rather quickly, closing the door after her,
"what is to be done? Did you hear carriage-wheels a few moments ago? Who
do you think have arrived? As I fancied would be the case, the De la
Zouches!" Miss Aubrey trembled and turned pale. "You must see--you
_must_ see--Lady De la Zouch, Kate--they have driven from Fotheringham
on purpose to take--_once more_--a last farewell! 'Tis very painful, but
what can be done? You know what dear, dear, good friends they are!"

"Is Lord De la Zouch come, also?" inquired Miss Aubrey, apprehensively.

"I will not deceive you, dearest Kate, they are _all_ come; but _she_,
only, is in the house: they are gone out to look for Charles, who is
walking in the park." Miss Aubrey trembled violently; and after
evidently a severe struggle with her feelings, the color having entirely
deserted her face, and left it of an ashy whiteness, "I cannot muster
up resolution enough, Agnes," she whispered. "I know their errand!"

"Care not about their errand, love!" said Mrs. Aubrey, embracing her
fondly. "You shall not be troubled--you shall not be persecuted." Miss
Aubrey shook her head, and grasped Mrs. Aubrey's hand.

"They do not, Agnes, they _cannot_ persecute me," replied Miss Aubrey,
with energy. "It is a cruel and harsh word to use--and!--consider how
noble, how disinterested is their conduct; _that_ it is which subdues
me!"

Mrs. Aubrey embraced still more closely her agitated sister-in-law, and
tenderly kissed her forehead.

"Oh, Agnes!" faltered Miss Aubrey, pressing her hand upon her heart to
relieve the intolerable oppression which she suffered--"would to Heaven
that I had never seen--never thought of him!"

"Don't fear, Kate! that he will attempt to see you on so sad an occasion
as this. Delamere is a man of infinite delicacy and generosity!"

"I know he is--I know he is," gasped Miss Aubrey, almost suffocated with
her emotions.

"Stay, I'll tell you what to do; I'll go down and return with Lady De la
Zouch: we can see her here, undisturbed and alone, for a few moments;
and then, nothing painful _can_ occur. Shall I bring her?" she inquired,
rising. Miss Aubrey did not dissent; and, within a very few minutes'
time, Mrs. Aubrey returned, accompanied by Lady De la Zouch. She was
rather an elderly woman. Her countenance was still handsome; and she
possessed a very dignified carriage. She was of an extremely
affectionate disposition, and passionately fond of Miss Aubrey. Hastily
drawing aside her veil as she entered the room, she stepped quickly up
to Miss Aubrey, kissed her, and grasped her hands, for some moments, in
silence.

"This is very sad work, Miss Aubrey," said she at length, hurriedly
glancing at the luggage lying piled up at the other end of the room.
Miss Aubrey made no answer, but shook her head. "It was useless
attempting it, dear Kate--we _could_ not stay at home; we have risked
being charged with cruel intrusion; forgive me, dearest, will you?
_They_," said Lady De la Zouch, pointedly, "will not come near you!"
Miss Aubrey trembled. "I feel as if I were parting with an only
daughter, Kate," said Lady De la Zouch, with sudden emotion. "How your
mamma and I loved one another!" said she, fondly, and burst into tears.

"For mercy's sake, open the window; I feel suffocated," faltered Miss
Aubrey. Mrs. Aubrey hastily drew up the window, and the cool refreshing
breeze of evening quickly diffused itself through the apartment, and
revived the drooping spirits of Miss Aubrey, who walked gently to and
fro about the room, supported by Lady De la Zouch and Mrs. Aubrey, and
soon recovered a tolerable degree of composure. The three ladies
presently stood, arm-in-arm, gazing through the deep bay-window at the
fine prospect which it commanded. The gloom of evening was beginning to
steal over the landscape.

"How beautiful!" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, faintly, with a deep sigh.

"The window in the northern tower of the Castle commands a still more
extensive view," said Lady De la Zouch, looking earnestly at Miss
Aubrey, who, as if conscious of some agitating allusion, burst into
tears. After standing gazing through the window for some time longer,
they stepped back into the room, and were soon engaged in deep and
earnest conversation.

For the last three weeks Mr. Aubrey had addressed himself with calmness
and energy to the painful duties which had devolved upon him, of
_setting his house in order_. Immediately after quitting the
dinner-table that day--a mere nominal meal to all of them--he had
retired to the library, to complete the extensive and important
arrangements consequent upon his abandonment of Yatton; and after about
an hour thus occupied, he went forth to take a solitary walk--a
melancholy--a last walk about the property. It was a moment which
severely tried his fortitude; but that fortitude stood the trial. He was
a man of lively sensibilities, and appreciated, to its utmost extent,
the melancholy and alarming change which had come over his fortunes.
Surely even the bluntest and coarsest feelings which ever tried to
disguise and dignify themselves under the name of STOICISM--to convert
into bravery, and fortitude, a stupid, sullen insensibility--must have
been not a little shaken by such scenes as Mr. Aubrey had had to pass
through during the last few weeks--scenes which I do not choose to
distress the reader's feelings by dwelling upon in detail. Mr. Aubrey
had no mean pretensions to real philosophy; but he had still juster
pretensions to an infinitely higher character,--that of a CHRISTIAN. He
had a firm unwavering conviction that whatever befell him, either of
good or evil, was by the ordination of the Almighty--infinitely Wise,
infinitely Good;--and this was the source of his fortitude and
resignation. He felt himself here standing upon ground which was
immovable.

To avert the misfortune which menaced him, he had neglected no rational
and _conscientious_ means. To retain the advantages of fortune and
station to which he had believed himself born, he had made the most
strenuous exertions consistent with a rigid sense of honor. What,
indeed, _could_ he have done, that he _had_ not done? He had caused the
claims of his opponent to be subjected to as severe a scrutiny as the
wit of man could suggest; _and they had stood the test_. Those claims,
and his own, had been each of them placed in the scales of justice;
those scales had been held up and poised by the pure and firm hands to
which the laws of God, and of the country, had committed the
administration of justice: on what ground could a just and reasonable
man quarrel with or repine at the issue? And supposing that a perverse
and subtle ingenuity in his legal advisers could have devised means for
delaying his surrender of the property to the individual who had been
solemnly declared its true owner, what real and ultimate advantage could
have been obtained by such a dishonorable line of conduct? Could the
spirit of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION tolerate the bare idea of it? Could
such purposes or intentions consist for one instant with the
consciousness that the awful eye of God was always upon every thought of
his mind, every feeling of his heart, every purpose of his will? A
thorough and lively conviction of God's moral government of the world
secured Aubrey a happy composure--a glorious and immovable resolution.
It enabled him to form a true estimate of things; it extracted the sting
from grief and regret; it dispelled the gloom which would otherwise have
settled portentously upon the future. Thus he had not _forgotten the
exhortation which spoke unto him, as unto a child: My son, despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him_. And if, indeed, religion had not done this for Mr. Aubrey, what
_could_ it have done, what would it have been worth? It would indeed
have been that which dull fools suppose it--a mere name, a melancholy
delusion. What hopeless and lamentable imbecility would it not have
argued, to have acknowledged the reality and influence of religion in
the hour of prosperity--and to have doubted, distrusted, or denied it in
the hour of adversity? When a child beholds the sun obscured by dark
clouds, he may think in his simplicity that it is gone forever; but a
MAN knows that behind is the sun, magnificent as ever; and that the next
moment, the clouds having rolled away, its glorious warmth and light
are again upon the earth. Thus is it, thought Aubrey with humble but
cheerful confidence, with the Almighty--who hath declared himself _the
Father of the spirits of all flesh_--

    "Behind a frowning Providence
      He hides a smiling face!
    Blind unbelief is sure to err,
      And scan His works in vain!
    God is His own interpreter,
      And He will make it plain!"

"Therefore, O my God!" thought Aubrey, as he gazed upon the lovely
scenes familiar to him from his birth, and from which a few short hours
were to separate him forever, "I do acknowledge Thy hand in what has
befallen me, and Thy mercy which enables me to bear it, as from Thee."
The scene around him was tranquil and beautiful--inexpressibly
beautiful. He stood under the shadow of a mighty elm-tree, the last of a
long and noble avenue, which he had been pacing in deep thought for
upwards of an hour. The ground was considerably elevated above the level
of the rest of the park. No sound disturbed the serene repose of the
approaching evening, except the distant and gradually diminishing sounds
issuing from an old rookery, and the faint low bubbling of a clear
streamlet which flowed not far from where he stood. Here and there,
under the deepening shadows cast by the lofty trees, might be seen the
glancing forms of deer, the only live things visible. "Life," said
Aubrey, to himself, with a sigh, as he leaned against the trunk of the
grand old tree under which he stood, and gazed with a fond and mournful
eye on the lovely scenes stretching before him, to which the subdued
radiance of the departing sunlight communicated a tone of tender
pensiveness; "life is, in truth, what the Scripture--what the voice of
nature--represents it--a long journey, during which the traveller stops
at many resting places. Some of them are more, others less beautiful;
from some he parts with more, from others with less regret; but _part he
must_, and pursue his journey, though he may often turn back to gaze
with lingering fondness and admiration at the scene which he has last
quitted. The next stage may be--_as all his journey might have
been_--bleak and desolate; but, through _that_ he is only passing: he
will not be condemned to stay in it, as he was not permitted to dwell in
the other; he is still journeying on, along a route which he cannot
mistake, to the point of his destination, his journey's end--the shores
of the vast, immeasurable, boundless ocean of eternity--HIS HOME!"

The deepening shadows of evening warned him to retrace his steps to the
Hall. Before quitting the spot upon which he had been so long standing,
he turned his head a little towards the right, to take a last view of an
object which called forth tender and painful feeling--it was the old
sycamore which his sister's intercession had saved from the axe. There
it stood, feeble and venerable object! its leafless silvery-gray
branches becoming in the fading light, dim and indistinct, yet
contrasting touchingly with the verdant strength of those near it. A
neat strong fence had been placed around it; but how much longer would
it receive such care and attention? Aubrey thought of the comparison
which had on a former occasion been made by his sister; and sighed
heavily as he looked his last at the old tree. Then he slowly walked on
towards the Hall. When about halfway down the avenue, he beheld two
figures apparently approaching him, but undistinguishable in the gloom
and the distance. As they neared him, he recognized Lord De la Zouch,
and Mr. Delamere. Suspecting the object of their visit, which a little
surprised him, since they had taken a final leave, and a very affecting
one, the day before, he felt a little anxiety and embarrassment. Nor was
he entirely mistaken. Lord De la Zouch, who advanced alone towards
Aubrey--Mr. Delamere turning back--most seriously pressed his son's suit
for the hand of Miss Aubrey, as he had often done before; declaring,
that though undoubtedly he wished a year or two first to elapse, during
which his son might complete his studies at Oxford, there was no object
dearer to the heart of Lady De la Zouch and himself, than to see Miss
Aubrey become their daughter-in-law. "Where," said Lord De la Zouch,
with much energy, "is he to look elsewhere for such an union of beauty,
of accomplishments, of amiability, of high-mindedness?" After a great
deal of animated conversation on this subject, during which Mr. Aubrey
assured Lord De la Zouch that _he_ would say everything which he
honorably could to induce his sister to entertain, or at all events, not
to discard the suit of Delamere; at the same time reminding him of the
firmness of her character, and the hopelessness of attempting to change
any determination to which she might have been led by her sense of
delicacy and honor,--Lord De la Zouch addressed himself in a very
earnest manner to matters more immediately relating to the personal
interests of Mr. Aubrey; entered with lively anxiety into all his future
plans and purposes; and once more pressed upon him the acceptance of
most munificent offers of pecuniary assistance, which, with many fervent
expressions of gratitude, Aubrey again declined. But he pledged himself
to communicate freely with Lord De la Zouch, in the event of an occasion
arising for such assistance as his Lordship had already so generously
volunteered. By this time Mr. Delamere had joined them, regarding Mr.
Aubrey with infinite earnestness and apprehension. All, however, he
said, was--and in a hurried manner to his father--"My mother is waiting
for you in the carriage, and wishes that we should immediately return."
Lord De la Zouch and his son again took leave of Mr. Aubrey. "Remember,
my dear Aubrey, remember the pledges you have repeated this evening,"
said the former. "I do, I will!" replied Mr. Aubrey, as they each wrung
his hands; and then, having grasped those of Lady De la Zouch, who sat
within the carriage powerfully affected, the door was shut; and they
were quickly borne away from the presence and the residence of their
afflicted friends. While Mr. Aubrey stood gazing after them, with folded
arms, in an attitude of melancholy abstraction, at the Hall door, he was
accosted by Dr. Tatham, who had come to him from the library, where he
had been, till a short time before, busily engaged reducing into writing
various matters which had been the subject of conversation between
himself and Mr. Aubrey during the day.

"I am afraid, my dear friend," said the doctor, "that there is a painful
but interesting scene awaiting you. You will not, I am sure, forbear to
gratify, by your momentary presence in the servants' hall, a body of
your tenantry, who are there assembled, having come to pay you--good
souls!--their parting respects."

"I would really rather be spared the painful scene," said Mr. Aubrey,
with emotion. "I am nearly unnerved as it is! Cannot you bid them adieu,
in my name? and say God bless them!"

"You _must_ come, my dear friend! If it _be_ painful, it will be but for
a moment; and the recollection of their hearty and humble expressions of
affection and respect will be pleasant hereafter. Poor souls!" he added
with not a little emotion, "you should see how crowded is Mr. Griffiths'
room with the presents they have each brought you, and which would
surely keep your whole establishment for months!--Cheeses, tongues,
hams, bacon, and I know not what beside!"

"Come, Doctor," said Mr. Aubrey, quickly, and with evidently a great
effort, "I will see them, my humble and worthy friends! if it _be_ but
for a moment; but I would rather have been spared the scene." He
followed Dr. Tatham into the spacious servants' hall, which he found
nearly filled by some forty or fifty of his late tenantry, who, as he
entered, rose in troubled silence to receive him. There were lights, by
which a hurried glance sufficed to show him the deep sorrow visible in
their countenances. "Well, sir," commenced one of them, after a moment's
hesitation--he seemed to have been chosen the spokesman of those
present--"we've come to tak' our leave; and a sad time it be for all of
us, and it may be, sir, for you." He paused, and added abruptly--"I
thought I could have said a word or two, sir, in the name of all of us,
but I've clean forgotten all; and I wish we could all forget that we
were come to part with you, sir;--but we sha'n't--no, never!--we shall
never see your like again, sir! God help you, sir!" Again he paused, and
struggled hard to conceal his emotions. Then he tried to say something
further, but his voice failed him.

"Squire, it may be law; but it be not justice, we all do think, that
hath taken Yatton from you, that was born to it," said one, who stood
next to him who had first spoken. "Who ever heard o' a scratch in a bit
of paper signifying the loss o' so much? It never were heard of afore,
sir, an' cannot be right!"

"You'll forgive me, Squire," said another, "but we shall never tak' to
t'new one that's coming after you!"

"My worthy--my dear friends," commenced Mr. Aubrey, with melancholy and
forced composure, as he stood beside Dr. Tatham, "this is a sad trial to
me--one which I had not expected, and am quite unprepared for. I have
had lately to go through many very painful scenes; but few more so than
the present. My dear friends, I can only say from my heart, God bless
you all! I shall never forget you, whom I have always respected, and
indeed been very proud of, as my tenantry, and whom I now, of course,
look at as my friends only. We shall _never_ forget you"----

"Lord Almighty bless you, sir, and Madam and Miss, and little Miss--and
the little squire!" said a voice, in a vehement manner, from amid the
throng, in tones which went to Mr. Aubrey's heart. His lips quivered,
and he ceased speaking for some moments. At length he resumed.

"You see my feelings are a little shaken by the sufferings which I have
gone through. I have only a word more to say to you. Providence has seen
fit, my friends, to deprive me of that which I had deemed to be my
birthright. God is good and wise; and I bow, as we must all bow, to His
will with reverence and resignation. And also, my dear friends, let us
always submit cheerfully to the laws under which we live. We must not
quarrel with their decision, merely because it happens to be adverse to
our own wishes. I, from my heart--and so must you, from
yours--acknowledge a firm, unshaken allegiance to the laws; they are
ordained by God, and He demands our obedience to them! society cannot
exist without them"--He paused. "I have to thank you," he presently
added in a subdued tone, "my worthy friends, for many substantial tokens
of your good-will, brought with you this evening. I assure you sincerely
that I value them far more"--he paused, and it was some moments before
he could proceed--"than if they had been of the most costly and splendid
description"----

"Lord, only hearken to t'squire!" called out a voice, as if on an
impulse of eager affection, which its rough, honest speaker could not
resist. This seemed entirely to deprive Mr. Aubrey of the power of
utterance, and he turned suddenly towards Dr. Tatham with an overflowing
eye and a convulsive quivering of the lips which showed the powerful
emotions with which he was contending. The next moment he stepped
forward and shook hands with those nearest. He was quickly surrounded,
and every one present grasped his hands, scarcely any of them able to
utter more than a brief but fervent "God bless you, sir!"

"I am sure, my friends," said Dr. Tatham, almost as much affected as any
of them, "that you cannot wish to prolong so afflicting a scene as this.
Mr. Aubrey is much exhausted, and has a long journey to take early in
the morning--and you had better now leave."

"Farewell! farewell, my kind and dear friends, farewell!--May God bless
you all, and all your families!" said Mr. Aubrey; and, most powerfully
affected, withdrew from a scene which he was not likely ever to forget.
He retired, accompanied by Dr. Tatham, to his library; where Mr.
Griffiths, his steward, was in readiness to receive his signature to
various documents. This done, the steward, after a few hurried
expressions of affection and respect, withdrew; and Mr. Aubrey had then
completed all the arrangements, and transacted all the business, which
had required his attention before quitting Yatton: which, at an early
hour in the morning, he was going to leave; having determined to go
direct to London, instead of accepting any of the numerous offers which
he had received from his friends in the neighborhood, to take up with
them his abode for, at all events, some considerable period. That,
however, would have been entirely inconsistent with the plans for his
future life, which he had formed and matured. He left the whole estate
in admirable order and condition. There was not a farm vacant, not a
tenant dissatisfied with the terms under which he held. Every document,
all the accounts connected with the estate, after having been carefully
examined by Mr. Parkinson, and Mr. Aubrey, and Mr. Griffiths, were in
readiness for the most scrupulous and searching investigation on the
part of Mr. Aubrey's successor and his agents.

Mr. Aubrey's library was already carefully packed up, and was to follow
him, on the ensuing day, to London, by water, as also were several
portions of the furniture--the residue of which was to be sold off
within a day or two's time. How difficult--how very difficult had it
been for them to choose which articles they would part with, and which
retain! The favorite old high-backed easy-chair, which had been worked
by Miss Aubrey herself; the beautiful ebony cabinet, which had been
given by her father to her mother, who had given it to Kate; the little
chairs of Charles and Agnes--and in which Mr. Aubrey and Kate, and all
their brothers and sisters--long since deceased--had sat when children;
Mrs. Aubrey's piano; these, and a few other articles, had been
successfully pleaded for by Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, and were to accompany
or rather follow them to London, instead of passing, by the auctioneer's
hammer, into the hands of strangers. The two carriage-horses, which had
drawn old Mrs. Aubrey in the family coach for many years, were to be
turned to grass, for the rest of their days, at Lady Stratton's. Poor
old Peggy was, in like manner, to have to herself a little field
belonging to Dr. Tatham. Little Charles's pony, a beautiful animal, and
most reluctantly parted with, was sent as a present, in his name, to
little Sir Harry Oldfield, one of his play-fellows. Hector, the
magnificent Newfoundland dog, was, at the vehement instance of Pumpkin,
the gardener, who had almost gone upon his knees to beg for the animal,
and declared that he loved the creature like a son--as I verily believe
he did, for they were inseparable, and their attachment was
mutual--given up to him, on his solemn promise to take great care of
him. Then there was a poor animal which they hardly knew how to dispose
of. It was a fine old favorite staghound, stone-blind, quite gray about
the head, and so very feeble, that it could but just crawl in and out of
its commodious kennel, and lie basking in the genial sunshine; wagging
its tail when any one spoke to it, and affectionately licking the hand
that patted it. Thus had it treated Mr. Aubrey, that very morning, as he
stood by, and stooped down to caress it for the last time. It was, at
his earnest request, assigned to Dr. Tatham, kennel and all; indeed the
worthy little doctor would have crammed the whole of his little premises
in a similar way, in order to have the more "keepsakes" and "memorials"
of his friends. Miss Aubrey's beautiful Blenheim spaniel, with its
brilliant black eyes, and long glossy graceful ears, was to accompany
her to London.

As for the servants--the housekeeper was going to keep the house of her
brother, a widower, at Grilston, and the butler was going to marry, and
quit service. As for the rest, Mr. Parkinson had, at Mr. Aubrey's
desire, written about them to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and Mr.
Gammon had sent word that such members of the establishment as chose,
might continue at Yatton, at all events till the pleasure of Mr.
Titmouse, upon the subject, should have been known. All the servants had
received a quarter's wages that morning from Mr. Griffiths, in the
presence of Mr. Aubrey, who spoke kindly to each, and earnestly
recommended them to conduct themselves respectfully towards his
successor. Scarce any of them could answer him, otherwise than by an
humble bow, or courtesy, accompanied by sobs and tears. One of them did
contrive to speak, and passionately expressed a wish that the first
morsel Mr. Titmouse ate in the house might choke him--a sally which
received so very grave a rebuke from Mr. Aubrey, as brought the hasty
offender to her knees, begging forgiveness; which, I need hardly say,
she received, but with a very serious admonition. Many of them most
vehemently entreated to be allowed to accompany Mr. Aubrey and his
family to London, and continue in their service, but in vain. Mr. Aubrey
had made his selection, having taken only his own valet, and Mrs.
Aubrey's maid, and one of the nursery-maids, and declaring that on no
consideration would he think of being accompanied by any other of the
servants.

There were some twenty or thirty poor old infirm cottagers, men and
women, who had been for years weekly pensioners on the bounty of Yatton,
and respecting whom Mr. Aubrey felt a painful anxiety. What could he do?
He gave the sum of fifty pounds to Dr. Tatham for their use; and
requested him to press their claims earnestly upon the new proprietor of
Yatton. He also wrote almost as many letters, as there were of these
poor people, on their behalf to his friends and neighbors. Oh, it was a
moving scene which had occurred at each of their little cottages, when
their benefactors, Mr. Aubrey, his wife, and sister, severally called to
bid them farewell, and receive their humble and tearful blessings! But
it was the parting with her school, which neither Kate nor her brother
saw any probability of being kept up longer than for a month or two
after their departure, which had occasioned Kate the greatest distress.
There were several reasons, which will occur to the reader, why no
application could be made, about the matter, from her, or on her
account, to Mr. Titmouse; even if she had not had reason to anticipate,
from what she had heard of his character, that he was a person unlikely
to feel any interest in such an institution. Nor had she liked to
trouble or burden the friends whom she left behind her, with the
responsibility of supporting and superintending her little
establishment. She had nothing for it, therefore, but to prepare the
mistress, and her scholars, for the breaking up of the school, within a
month of her departure from Yatton. She gave the worthy woman, the
mistress, a present of a five-pound note; and five shillings to each of
the children. She felt quite unequal to the task of personally taking
leave of them, as she had intended, and several times attempted. She
therefore, with many tears, wrote the following lines, and gave them to
Dr. Tatham, to read aloud in the school, when their good and beautiful
writer should be far on her way towards London. The little doctor paused
a good many times while he read it, and complained of his glasses.

     "My dear little girls,--You know that I have already bid each of
     you good-by; and though I tried to say something to all of you at
     once, I was not able, because I was so sorry to part with you, and
     tell you that my little school must be given up. So I have written
     these few lines, to tell you that I love you all, and have tried to
     be a good friend to you. Be sure not to forget your spelling and
     reading, and your needle. Your mothers have promised to hear you
     say your catechisms; you must also be sure to say your prayers, and
     to read your Bibles, and to behave very seriously at church, and to
     be always dutiful to your parents. Then God will bless you all! I
     hope you will not forget us, for we shall often think of you when
     we are a great way off; and Dr. Tatham will now and then write and
     tell us how you are going on. Farewell, my dear little girls; and
     may God bless and preserve you all! This is the prayer of both of
     us--Mrs. Aubrey and
                                                    "CATHERINE AUBREY.

         "_Yatton, 15th May 18--._"

The above was not written in the uniform and beautiful hand usual with
Miss Aubrey; it was, on the contrary, rather irregular, and evidently
written hastily; but Dr. Tatham preserved it to the day of his death,
and always thought it beautiful.

On the ensuing morning, at a very early hour, Dr. Tatham left the
vicarage, to pay his last visit to friends whom it almost broke his
heart to part with, in all human probability forever. He started, but on
a moment's reflection ceased to be surprised, at the sight of Mr. Aubrey
approaching him from the direction of the little churchyard. He was
calm, but his countenance bore the traces of very recent emotion. They
greeted each other in silence, and so walked on for some time,
arm-in-arm, slowly, towards the Hall. It was a dull heavy morning,
almost threatening rain. The air seemed full of oppression. The only
sounds audible were the hoarse clamorous sounds issuing from the old
rookery, at some distance on their left. Mr. Aubrey and Dr. Tatham
interchanged but few words, as they walked along the winding pathway to
the Hall. The first thing which attracted their eyes, after passing
under the gateway, was the large old family carriage, standing opposite
the Hall door, where stood some luggage, sufficient for the journey,
ready to be placed upon it; the remainder having been sent on the day
before to London. How mournful was the sight! On entering the Hall, they
found its heart-broken inmates all up, and dressed. The children were
taking their last breakfast in the nursery; Charles making many
inquiries of the weeping servants, which they could answer only by tears
and kisses. In vain was the breakfast-table spread for the senior
travellers. There sat poor Kate, in travelling trim, before the antique
silver urn, attempting to perform, with tremulous hand, her accustomed
office; but neither she, nor Mrs. Aubrey, was equal to the task; which,
summoning the housekeeper into the room, they devolved upon her, and
which she was scarce able to perform. Mr. Aubrey and Dr. Tatham were
standing there; but neither of them spoke. A short time before, Mr.
Aubrey had requested the servants to be summoned, as usual, to morning
prayer in the accustomed room, and requested Dr. Tatham to officiate. As
soon, however, as the sorrowful little assemblage was collected before
him, he whispered to Mr. Aubrey that he felt unequal to go through the
duty with the composure which it required; and after a pause, he said,
"Let us kneel down;" and in a low voice, often interrupted by his own
emotions, and the sobs of those around him, he read, with touching
simplicity and solemnity, the ninety-first psalm; adding the Lord's
prayer, and a very tremulous benediction.

The bitter preparations for starting at an early hour, seven o'clock,
were soon afterwards completed. Half smothered with the kisses and
caresses of the affectionate servants, little Charles and Agnes were
already seated in the carriage, on the laps of their two attendants,
exclaiming eagerly, "Come, papa! come, mamma! What a while you are!"
Just then, poor Pumpkin, the gardener, scarce able to speak, made his
appearance, his arms full of nosegays, which he had been culling for the
last two hours--having one a-piece for each of the travellers, servants,
and children, and all. The loud angry bark of Hector was heard from time
to time, little Charles calling loudly for him; but Pumpkin had fastened
him up, for fear of his starting off after the carriage. At length,
having scarcely tasted breakfast, the travellers made their appearance
at the Hall door. Kate and Mrs. Aubrey were utterly overcome at the
sight of the carriage, and wept bitterly. They threw their arms
passionately around, and fervently kissed, their venerable friend and
pastor, Dr. Tatham, who was grievously agitated. Then they tore
themselves from him, and hastily got into the carriage. As he stood
alone, bareheaded, on their quitting him, he lifted his hands, but could
scarce utter a parting benediction. Mr. Aubrey, almost overpowered with
his emotions, then grasped his hand, whispering, "Farewell, my dear and
venerable friend! Farewell!" "The Lord God of thy fathers bless thee!"
murmured Dr. Tatham, clasping Mr. Aubrey's hand in both of his own, and
looking solemnly upward. Mr. Aubrey, taking off his hat, turned towards
him an unutterable look: then, waving his hand to the group of agitated
servants standing within and without the door, he stepped into the
carriage; the door was shut; and they rolled slowly away. Outside the
park gates were collected more than a hundred people, to bid them
farewell--all the men, when the carriage came in sight, taking off their
hats. The carriage stopped for a moment. "God bless you all! God bless
you!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, waving his hand, while from each window was
extended the white hand of Kate and Mrs. Aubrey, both of which were
fervently kissed and shaken by those who were nearest. Again the
carriage moved on; and quickening their speed, the horses soon bore them
out of the village. Within less than half an hour afterwards, the
tearful eyes of the travellers, as they passed a familiar turning of the
road, had looked their last on Yatton!

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE _concerning the law of_ ERASURES _and_ ESTOPPELS.

I. ERASURES.--The question--What is the effect of an erasure, an
interlineation, or alteration apparent in a material part of a deed
above thirty years old, when offered in evidence?--has led to much
discussion both among professional and general readers of this work, as
well at home as abroad; and many communications upon the subject have
been received by the author. Lord Widdrington at the trial, and
subsequently he and the full court, held, in the case of _Doe_ d.
_Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_, that such an erasure was fatal to the case of
the party who relied on the instrument in which it was exhibited. In
constructing this portion of the story, the author, aware of some
difference of opinion on the subject among lawyers, relied upon the
following passage in a work of great and long-established authority,
(BULLER'S _Nisi Prius_, p. 255,) in which the law is thus laid down--"If
there be any [material] blemish, by razure or interlineation, in a deed,
it ought to be proved, though it were above thirty years old, by the
witnesses if living, and if dead, by proving the handwriting of at least
one of the witnesses, and also the hand of the party, _in order to
encounter the presumption arising from the blemishes in the deed_."
Such, also, is the law laid down in Lord Chief Baron Gilbert's Treatise
on Evidence, (p. 89,) and the proposition appears adopted, and these two
high authorities cited, in the last edition, (the ninth,) of that
celebrated standard text-book, PHILLIPS _on Evidence_, p. 205, published
since the former edition of this work. There is an impression, however,
that this strict rule would not _now_ be acted upon; on the ground that
the presumption resulting from a continued possession, in conformity
with the effect of a deed with erasure or interlineation, is strong
enough to overcome the presumption of forgery afforded by the
alterations themselves. Still it is possible to foresee great danger
arising out of the adoption of such a rule: for a man enjoying an estate
in lands, less than one of fee simple, may alter the deed so as to give
to himself that superior estate, and then, after a lapse of thirty
years, produce the deed so altered, and thereby defeat the innocent
party challenging his title to the property. Possibly it would now be
submitted as a question for a jury to decide, _whether the alteration
had been made previously or subsequently to the delivery of the deed?_
for if _previously_, the deed remains valid and binding. A deed thirty
years old is called "an ancient document," and is said to "prove
itself"--_i. e._ to require no proof of its execution, provided it shall
have been produced from a custody which may be reasonably and naturally
explained, even though not the strictly proper legal custody.--See the
late case of Doe _d._ Neale _v._ Sampler, 8 _Adolphus and Ellis' Rep._
151; and Doe _d._ Wildgoose _v._ Pearce, 2 _Moody and Robinson_, 240. As
to the point made by the Attorney-General, at the trial, that where the
right is once vested--_i. e._ the instant after the execution of the
deed--_such execution_ creating a title to the land in question--that
right and title cannot be affected by any subsequent alteration of the
deed;--it has been affirmed to be good law in a recent solemn decision
of the Court of Exchequer, and confirmed in a Court of Error.--_See
Davidson_ v. _Cooper_, 11 Meeson _v._ Welsley, 799-800. "The moment
after the execution of the deed, it has become valueless," said Lord
Abinger, "except as affording _evidence_ of the fact that it had been
executed." In this case, in which the author was engaged, (in 1843,) the
whole doctrine of erasures was thoroughly canvassed; and it was decided,
on error, that when an instrument, (whether under seal or not,) which is
_the foundation_ of a right sought to be enforced, is altered in a
material part, even by a stranger, without the privity of the party
affected by it, such alteration makes the instrument utterly void. The
Scotch law respecting erasures is exceedingly stringent; and even goes
farther than that laid down by Lord Widdrington.

II. ESTOPPEL.--Both this doctrine, and that of erasures, as illustrated
by this work, formed the subject of elaborate investigation in an
article in the _American Jurist_ for 1842, (vol. xxvii. pp. 50, et sec.)
The question relating to estoppel, is thus stated there in abstract
terms. "If the son and heir-apparent of a tenant in fee-simple, conveys
the land thus held, and afterwards dies in his father's lifetime, is the
heir of the father, who also makes his pedigree through the son,
estopped by that son's conveyance?" The conclusion arrived at is, that,
according to Lord Coke, if such conveyance had been with warranty, the
heir would be bound, if assets descended to him from the son.[A] But
statute 4 and 5 Anne, c. 16 § 22, makes void as against his heir all
collateral warranties made by an ancestor who has no estate of
inheritance, in _possession_; and the Act just passed, (1844--stat. 7
and 8 Vict. c. 76 § 5,) permitting the alienation of contingent
interests, expressly declares that it shall not enable any heir to
dispose of his _expectancy_.

  [A] By "Warranty," is meant the clause with which deeds of feoffment
  formerly concluded, and by which the feoffor agreed that he and his
  heirs would "warrant, acquit, and forever defend the feoffee and his
  heirs against all persons." This old form has long been obsolete;
  and may be considered to have been, by two late statutes, abolished.

In this story an heir is represented as conveying away his expectancy;
and the author has received an obliging communication on the subject,
from one of the greatest conveyancers who ever lived--Mr. Preston--to
the following effect. "The rule of law is--_Qui non habet, ille non dat:
nemo potest plus juris in alium transferre, quam ipse habet._ Therefore
a grant by an expectant heir, _simpliciter_, is void. But the doctrine
of _estoppels_ (a 'cunning learning,' says Lord Coke) affords exceptions
to this general rule." A feoffment with warranty binds an heir, however,
not by estoppel, but by _rebutter_, "in order to avoid circuity of
action, which is not favored by the law."--(Co. Litt. 265 a.) He might
be estopped by a lease for years, and by matter of record--or by fine
and recovery, before those methods of assurance were abolished; but a
conveyance by Lease and Release would not bind the heir, on the
subsequent descent of the estate: for he had _no right at all_ at the
time of the release, made, but that once in the ancestor; after whose
decease the heir may enter in to the land against his own release.--(Co.
Litt. 265 a.) "The late vice-chancellor, Sir John Leach," says Mr.
Preston, "once decided that a release _did_ operate as an estoppel, in
conformity with my argument before him; but Lord Lyndhurst on appeal,
contrary to his own first impression, on Sir Edward Sugden's handing up
to him my own Book on Conveyancing, as a _contre projet_ to my attempt
to support the vice-chancellor's decision, overruled that decision."




CHAPTER V.


Rank is very apt to attract and dazzle vulgar and feeble optics; and the
belief that such is its effect upon mankind generally, is unspeakably
gratifying to a vain and ignorant possessor of that rank. Of the truth
of one part of this observation, take as an illustration the case of
Tittlebat Titmouse; of the other, that of the Earl of Dreddlington. The
former's dinner engagement with the latter, his august and awful
kinsman, was an event of such magnitude as to absorb almost all his
faculties in the contemplation of it, and also occasion him great
anxiety in preparing for an effective appearance upon so signal an
occasion. Mr. Gammon had repeatedly, during the interval, instructed his
anxious pupil, if so he might be called, as to the manner in which he
ought to behave. He was--Heaven save the mark, poor Titmouse!--to assume
an air of mingled deference, self-possession, and firmness; not, on the
one hand, to be overawed by the greatness with which he would be brought
into contact, nor, on the other, unduly elated by a sense of his own
suddenly acquired importance. He was, on the contrary, to steer evenly
between the extremes of timorousness and temerity--to _aim_, at least,
at that happy mean, so grateful to those able to appreciate the effort,
and object, of those who had attained to it. Titmouse was to remember
that, great as was the Earl of Dreddlington, he was yet _but a
man_--related, too, by consanguinity, to him, the aforesaid Titmouse;
who might, moreover, before many years should have elapsed, become
himself Lord Drelincourt, and by consequence equally entitled, with the
present possessor of that resplendent rank, to the homage of mankind. At
the same time that the earl's advanced years gave him a natural claim to
the reverence of his young kinsman--(whom his Lordship was about to
introduce into the sublime regions of aristocracy, and also of political
society)--Titmouse might extract a few ingredients of consolation from
the reflection, that his income probably _exceeded_, by a third, that of
the Earl of Dreddlington. This is the sum of Mr. Gammon's _general_
instructions to his eager and excited pupil; but he also gave Titmouse
many minor hints and suggestions. He was to drink very little
wine--(whereat Titmouse demurred somewhat vehemently, and asked "How the
d--l he was to _get his steam_ up without it?")--and on no account to
call for beer or porter, to which plebeian beverages, indeed, he might
consider himself as having bid a long and last adieu;--to say
occasionally, only, "my Lord" and "your Lordship," in addressing the
earl--and "your Ladyship," in addressing Lady Cecilia;--and, above all,
never to appear in a hurry, but to do and say whatever he had to do and
say calmly; for that the nerves of aristocracy were very delicate, and
could not bear a bustle, or the slightest display of energy or feeling.
Then, as to his _dress_--Gammon, feeling himself treading on very
doubtful ground, intimated merely that the essence of true fashion was
_simplicity_--but here Titmouse grew fidgety, and his Mentor ceased.

During the night which ushered in the eventful day on which Titmouse
dined with the Earl of Dreddlington, our friend got but very little
sleep. Early in the morning he engaged a most respectable glass-coach
to convey him westward in the evening, in something like style; and
before noon, his anxieties were set at rest by the punctual arrival of
various articles of dress, decoration, and scent--for Titmouse had a
great idea of scents. As for his new watch and its brilliant gold
guard-chain--ambitious reader! you should have seen them! About
half-past four o'clock Titmouse retired to his bedroom, and resigned
himself into the hands of Mr. Twirl, the tip-top hairdresser from the
Strand, whose agreeable manipulations, and still more agreeable
small-talk, occupied upwards of an hour; Titmouse, from time to time,
giving the anxious operator abundant notice of the high quarter in which
his handiwork was likely soon to be scrutinized.

"Pray-a, can you tell me," quoth Titmouse, drawlingly, shortly after
Twirl had commenced his operations, "how long it will take me to get
from this infernal part of the town to Grosvenor Square? _Dem_ long way,
isn't it, Mr. What's-your-name?"

"Grosvenor Square, sir?" said Twirl, glibly, but with a perceptible dash
of deference in his tone; "why it _is_ as one might say a tolerable way
off, certainly; but you can't well miss your way _there_, sir, of all
places in town"----

"My coachman," interrupted Titmouse, with a fine air, "of course, had I
thought of it, _he_ must know, dem him, of course!"

"Oh! to be sure, sir. There's none but people of the most _highest_ rank
lives in that quarter, sir. Excuse me, sir, but I've a brother-in-law
that's valet to the Duke of Dunderwhistle there"----

"Indeed! How far off is that from Lord Dreddlington's?" inquired
Titmouse, carelessly.

"Lord Dreddlington's, sir?--Well, I never! Isn't it particular strange,
if that's where you're going, sir--it's next door to the Duke's--the
very next door, sir!"

"'Pon my life, is it indeed? How devilish odd!"

"Know the Earl of Dreddlington then, I presume, sir?"

"Ya-as, I should think so; he's my--my--relation, that's all; and
devilish near too!"

Mr. Twirl instantly conceived a kind of reverence for the gentleman upon
whom he was operating.

"Well, sir," he presently added in a still more respectful tone than
before, "p'r'aps you'll think it a liberty, sir; but, do you know, I've
several times had the honor of seeing his Lordship in the street at a
little distance--and there's a--a family likeness between you, sir--'pon
my word, sir. It struck me, directly I saw you, that you was like some
_nob_ I'd seen at the other end of the town." [Here Titmouse experienced
pleasurable sensations, similar to those said to be enjoyed by a cat
when you pass your hand down its glossy coat in the right direction.]
"Will you allow me, sir, to give your hair a good brushing, sir, before
I dress it? I always like to take the _greatest_ pains with the hair of
my quality customers!--Do you know, sir, that I had the honor of
dressing his Grace's hair for a whole fortnight together, once when my
brother-in-law was ill; and though p'r'aps I oughtn't to say it, his
Grace expressed the highest satisfaction at my exertions, sir."

"'Pon my life, and _I_ should say you were an uncommon good hand--I've
known lots worse, I assure you; men that would have spoiled the best
head of hair going, by Jove!"

"Sir, you're very kind. I assure you, sir, that to do justice to a
_gent's_ hair requires an uncommon deal of practice, and a sort of
_nat'ral_ talent for it besides. Lord, sir! how much depends on a gent's
hair, don't it? Of two coming into a room, it makes all the difference,
sir! Believe me, sir, it's no use being well-dressed, nay, nor
good-looking, if as how the hair a'n't done--what I call--_correct!_"

"By Jove, I really think you're nigh about the mark," said Titmouse;
and after a pause, during which Mr. Twirl had been brushing away at one
particular part of the head with some vehemence, "Well," he exclaimed
with a sigh, ceasing for a moment his vigorous exertions--"I'm _blest_
if I can manage it, do what I will!"

"Eh? What's that? What is it?" inquired Titmouse, a little alarmedly.

"Why, sir, it's what we gents, in our profession, calls a _feather_,
which is the most _hobstinatest_ thing in nature."

"What's a _feather_?" quoth Titmouse, rather faintly.

"You see, sir, 'tis when a small lot of hair on a gent's head _will_
stick up, do all we can to try and get it down; and (excuse me, sir,)
_you've_ got a regular rattler!" Titmouse put up his hand to feel, Twirl
guiding it to the fatal spot; there it was, just as Twirl had described
it.

"What's to be done?" murmured Titmouse.

"I'm afraid, sir, you don't use our OSTRICH GREASE and RHINOCEROS
MARROW, sir."

"Your _what_?" cried Titmouse, apprehensively, with a dismally distinct
recollection of the tragedy of the Cyanochaitanthropopoion, and the
Damascus Cream, and the Tetaragmenon Abracadabra; matters which he at
once mentioned to Mr. Twirl.

"Ah, it's not _my_ custom, sir," quoth Twirl, "to run down other gents'
inventions; but my real opinion is, that they're all an imposition--a
rank imposition, sir. I didn't like to say it, sir; but I soon saw there
had been somebody a-prac_ti_sing on your hair."

"What, is it _very_ plain?" cried Titmouse, with a kind of horror,
starting up and stepping to the glass.

"No, sir--not so _very_ plain; only _you've_ got, as I might say,
_accustomed_ to the sight of it; but when it's properly curled, and
puckered up, and frizzed about, it won't show--nor the feather neither,
sir; so, by your leave, here goes, sir;" and, after about a quarter of
an hour's more labor, he succeeded in parting it right down the middle
of the head, bringing it out into a bold curl towards each eyebrow, and
giving our friend quite a new and very fascinating appearance, even in
his own eyes. And as for the color--it really was not so very marked,
after all; a little purple-hued and mottled, to be sure, in parts, but
not to a degree to attract the eye of a casual observer. Twirl having
declared, at length, his labors completed--regarding Titmouse's head
with a look of proud satisfaction--Titmouse paid him half a crown, and
also ordered a pot of ostrich grease and of rhinoceros marrow, (the one
being _suet_, the other _lard_, differently scented and colored,) and
was soon left at liberty to proceed with the important duties of the
toilet. It took him a good while; but in the end he was supremely
successful. He wore black tights, (_i. e._ pantaloons fitting closely to
his legs, and tied round his ankles with black ribbons,) silk stockings,
and shoes with glittering silver buckles. His white neckerchief was tied
with great elegance, not a superfluous wrinkle being visible in it. His
shirt-front of lace, had two handsome diamond pins, connected together
by a little delicate gold chain, glistening in the midst of it. Then he
had a white waistcoat edge, next a crimson one, and lastly a glorious
sky-blue satin waistcoat, spangled all over with gold flowers
inwrought--and across it hung his new gold watch-guard, and his silver
guard for his eyeglass, producing an inconceivably fine effect. His coat
was of a light brown, of exquisite cut, fitting him as closely as if he
had been born in it, and with burnished brass buttons, of sugar-loaf
shape. 'Twas padded also with great judgment, and really took off more
of his round-shouldered awkwardness of figure than any coat he had ever
worn before. Then he had a fine white pocket-handkerchief, soaked in
lavender water; and immaculate white kid gloves. Thus habited, he stood
before his glass, bowing fifty different times, and adjusting his
expression to various elegant forms of address. He was particularly
struck with the combined effect of the two curls of his hair towards
each eye, and the hair underneath his chin curved upwards on each side
of his mouth in complete symmetry. I have ascertained from Mr. Titmouse
himself, that on this memorable occasion of his first introduction to
NOBILITY, every item of dress and decoration was entirely new; and when
at length his labors had been completed, he felt great composure of
mind, and a consciousness of the decisive effect which he must needs
produce upon those into whose presence he was so soon to be ushered. His
"carriage" was presently announced; and after keeping it standing for a
few minutes, (which he conceived to be usual with fine people,) he
gently placed his hat upon his head; drew on one glove, took his little
ebony cane in his hand; and, with a hurried inward prayer that he might
be equal to the occasion, stepped forth from his apartment and passed on
to the glass-coach. Such a brilliant little figure, I will take upon
myself to say, had never before issued, nor will perhaps ever again
issue, from the Cabbage-Stalk Hotel. The waiters whom he passed,
inclined towards him with instinctive reverence. He was _very_ fine, to
be sure; but who could, they justly thought, be dressed too finely that
had ten thousand a-year, and was gone to dine with a lord in Grosvenor
Square?

Titmouse was soon on his way towards that at once desired and dreaded
region. He gazed with a look of occasional pity and contempt, as he
passed along, at the plebeian pedestrians, and the lines of shops on
each side of the narrow streets, till increasing indications of superior
modes of existence presented themselves; and then he began to feel not a
little fidgety and nervous. The streets grew wider; the squares greater;
hackney-coaches (unsightly objects!) became fewer and fewer, giving
place to splendid vehicles--coaches, and chariots--with one, two, and
even three footmen, in elegant liveries, clustering behind, with long
canes, cockades, and shoulder-knots; crimson, blue, green, bear and
tiger skin hammercloths, with burnished coronets and crests upon them;
sleek coachmen with wigs and three-cornered hats, and horses that pawed
the ground with very pride; ladies within, glistening in satin, lace,
and jewels--their lords beside them, leaning back with countenances so
stern and haughty; oh, by all that was grand and tremendous! Titmouse
felt himself getting now within the very vortex of greatness and
fashion, and experienced a frequent fluttering and catching of the
breath, and a sense of indefinite distressing apprehension. He was,
however, now _in for it_--and there was no retreat. As he neared
Grosvenor Square, he heard, ever and anon, terrific thundering noises at
the doors opposite which these splendid vehicles had drawn up--as if the
impatient footmen were infuriated because the doors did not fly open of
themselves, at the sound of the approaching carriage-wheels. At length
he entered Grosvenor Square, that "pure empyrean" of earthly greatness.
Carriages rolled calmly and haughtily past him, others dashed
desperately in different directions. At each side of Lord Dreddlington's
house, were carriages setting down with tremendous uproar. Mr. Titmouse
felt his color going, and his heart began to beat much faster than
usual. 'Twas quite in vain that he "hemmed" two or three times, by way
of trying to reassure himself: he felt that his hour was come; and would
have been glad, at the moment, of any decent excuse for driving off home
again, and putting off the evil day a little longer. Opposite the
dreaded door had now drawn up Mr. Titmouse's glass-coach; and the decent
coachman--whose well-worn hat, and long, clean, but threadbare blue
coat, and ancient-looking top-boots, bespoke their wearer's
thriftiness--slowly alighting, threw the reins on his quiet horses'
backs, and gave a modest _rat-tat-tat-tat-tat_ at the door without
ringing.

"What name shall I give, sir?" said he, returning to his coach, and
letting down the loud clanking steps, with such a noise as seemed to
indicate his desire to show the solid metal structure of them!

"Titmouse--Mr. Titmouse;" replied our friend, hurriedly, as the lofty
door was thrown open by the corpulent porter; disclosing several footmen
in light blue liveries, with silver shoulder-knots, and powdered heads,
standing in the hall waiting for him.

"Mr. Titmouse!" exclaimed the coachman to the servants: then, having
returned to the coach--"When shall I come back for you, sir?" he
inquired of his flustered fare.

"D-- me, sir--don't bother _me_," faltered Titmouse, quitting the
vehicle with great trepidation: and the next moment he was in the hands
of the Philistines--the hall door was closed upon him. All his presence
of mind had evaporated; the excellent lessons given him by Mr. Gammon
had disappeared like breath from the surface of a mirror. Though Lord
Dreddlington's servants had never before seen in the house so strange an
object as poor little Titmouse, they were of far too highly polished
manners to appear to notice anything unusual. They silently motioned him
up-stairs with a bland courteous air, he carrying his little
agate-headed cane in one hand, and his new hat in the other. A
gentlemanly person in a full black dress suit, opened the drawing-room
door for him, with an elegant inclination, which Titmouse very
gracefully returned. A faint mist seemed to be in the drawing-room for a
second or two, during which Titmouse heard his name gently whispered by
the gentleman who had introduced him; quickly clearing away, however,
he beheld, at the upper end, but two figures, that of an old gentleman,
and a young lady--they were, in fact, the Earl of Dreddlington and Lady
Cecilia. Now--if truth must be told--that great man had not been a whit
behindhand, in the matter of dress, with the little creature now
trembling before him; being, in truth, full as anxious to make an
effective first appearance in the eyes of Mr. Titmouse, as he in those
of the Earl of Dreddlington. And each had, in his way, completely
succeeded. There was little or no substantial difference between them.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Dreddlington was an old experienced
fool, and Tittlebat Titmouse a young inexperienced one. They were the
same species of plant, but had grown in different soils. The one had
had to struggle through a neglected existence by the dusty, hard
road-side of life; the other had had all the advantage of hot-house
cultivation--its roots striking deep into, and thriving upon, the rich
manure of sycophancy and adulation!--We have seen how anxious was our
little friend to appear as became the occasion, before his great
kinsman; who in his turn had several times during the day exulted
secretly in the anticipation of the impression which must be produced
upon the mind of Titmouse by the sudden display, in the earl's person,
of the sublimest distinctions which society can bestow, short of
royalty. It had once or twice occurred to the earl, whether he could
find any fair excuse for appearing in his full general's uniform; but on
maturer reflection, governed by that simplicity and severity of taste
which ever distinguished him, he had abandoned that idea, and appeared
in a plain blue coat, white waistcoat, and black knee-breeches. But on
his left breast glittered one or two foreign orders, and across his
waistcoat was the broad red ribbon of the Bath. His hair was white and
fine; his cold blue eye and haughty lip gave him an expression of
severe dignity: and he stood erect as an arrow. Lady Cecilia reclined on
the sofa, with an air of languor and _ennui_ which had become habitual
to her; and was dressed in glistening white satin, with a necklace of
large and very beautiful pearls. The earl was standing in an attitude of
easy grace to receive his guest, as to whose personal appearance, by the
way, he was quite in the dark--Mr. Titmouse might be a great or a little
man, and forward or bashful; and require a corresponding demeanor and
address on the part of the earl. "Gracious Powers!" he involuntarily
exclaimed to himself, the instant his eye caught sight of Titmouse, who
approached slowly, making profound and formal obeisances. The earl stood
rooted to the spot which he had occupied when Titmouse entered. If his
servants had turned an ape into the drawing-room, his Lordship could
scarcely have felt or exhibited greater amazement than he now
experienced, for a moment. "Ah, Heavens!" thought he, "what a fool have
we here? what creature is this?" Then it flashed across his mind;--"May
this be THE FUTURE LORD DRELINCOURT?" He was on the point of recoiling
from his suddenly-discovered kinsman in dismay, (as for Lady Cecilia,
she gazed at him, through her glass, in silent horror, after a faint
exclamation, on his first becoming visible, of "Gracious! Papa!") when
his habitual self-command came to his assistance; and, advancing very
slowly a step or two towards Titmouse--who, after a hurried glance
around him, saw no place to deposit his hat and cane upon except the
floor, on which he accordingly dropped them--the earl extended his hand,
slightly compressed the tips of Titmouse's fingers, and bowed
courteously, but with infinite concern in his features.

"I am happy, Mr. Titmouse, to make your acquaintance," said the earl,
slowly--"Sir, I have the honor to present you to my daughter, the Lady
Cecilia." Titmouse, who by this time had got into a sort of cold
sweat--a condition from which the earl was really not _very_ far
removed--made a very profound and formal bow, (he had been taking
lessons from a posture-master to one of the theatres,) first to the
earl, and then to Lady Cecilia, who rose about two inches from the sofa,
with an almost audible sigh, and then sank again upon it, without
removing her eyes from the figure of Titmouse, who went on bowing, first
to the one and then to the other, till the earl had engaged him in
conversation.

"It gives me pleasure, sir, to see that you are punctual in your
engagements. I am so too, sir; and owe to it no small portion of any
success which I may have had in life. Punctuality, sir, in small
matters, leads to punctuality in great matters." This was said very
deliberately, and with a sort of freezing grandeur.

"Oh yes, my Lord! quite so, your Lordship," stammered Titmouse, suddenly
recollecting a part of Gammon's instructions; "to be sure--wouldn't have
been behind time, your Lordship, for a minute, my Lord; uncommon bad
manners, if it please your Lordship"----

"Will you be seated, sir?" interrupted the earl, dignifiedly motioning
him to a chair, and then sitting down beside him; after which his
Lordship seemed, for a second or two, to forget himself; staring in
silence at Titmouse, and then in consternation at Lady Cecilia. "I--I--"
said he, suddenly recollecting himself, "beg your par--sir, I mean--I
congratulate you upon--your recent success. Sir, it must have been
rather a surprise to you?"

"Oh yes, sir--my Lord, most uncommon, may it please your
Lordship--particular--but _right is right_--please your Lordship"----

["Oh Heavens! merciful Heavens! How horrid is all this! Am I awake or
only dreaming? 'Tis an idiot--and what's worse, a vulgar idiot! _And
this thing may become Lord Drelincourt!_" This was what was passing
through Lord Dreddlington's mind, while his troubled eye was fixed upon
Titmouse.]

"It is, indeed, Mr. Titmouse," replied his Lordship, "very true, sir;
what you say is correct. Quite so; exactly." His eye was fixed on
Titmouse, but his words were uttered, as it were, mechanically, and in a
musing manner. It flitted for a moment across his mind, whether he
should ring the bell, and order the servant to show out of the house the
fearful imp which had just been shown into it; but at that critical
moment he detected poor Titmouse's eye fixed with a kind of reverent
intensity upon his Lordship's glittering orders. 'Twas a lucky look,
that, for Titmouse, since it began to melt away the ice which was
beginning to incrust the little heart of his august relative. 'Twas
evident that the poor young man had not been accustomed to society,
thought the earl, with an approach towards the compassionate mood. He
was frightfully dressed, to be sure; and as for his speech, he was
manifestly overawed by the Presence in which he found himself; [that
thought melted a little more of the ice.] Yet, was it not evident that
he had _some_ latent power of appreciating real distinction, when he
beheld it? [his Lordship's little heart here lost _all_ the ice which
had begun so suddenly to collect round it.] And again;--he has actually
thrust out the intolerable Aubrey, and is now lawful owner of Yatton--of
TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR----

"Did you see the review, to-day, sir?" inquired the earl, rather
blandly--"His Majesty was there, sir, and seemed to enjoy the scene."
Titmouse, with a timid air, said that he had not seen it, as he had been
at a boatrace upon the river; and after a few more general
observations--"Will you permit me, sir? It is from A QUARTER requiring
the highest--a-hem!" said the earl, as a note was brought him, which he
immediately opened and read. Lady Cecilia, also, appearing to be
reading, Titmouse had a moment's breathing time and interval of relief.
What would he have given, he thought, for some other person, or several
persons, to come in and divide the attention--the intolerably oppressive
attention of the two august individuals then before him! He seized the
opportunity to cast a furtive glance around the room. It opened into a
second, which opened into a third: how spacious, each, and lofty! And
glittering glass chandeliers in each! What chimney and pier glasses!
What rich flowered satin curtains--they must have cost twelve or
fourteen shillings a-yard at least!--The carpets, of the finest
Brussels--and they felt like velvet to the feet;--then the brackets, of
marble and gold, with snowy statues and vases glistening upon each;
chairs so delicate, and gilded all over--he almost feared to sit down on
them. What would the Quirks and Tag-rags think of this! Faugh--only to
think for a moment of Alibi House and Satin Lodge!--Then there was the
Lady Cecilia--a lady of high rank! How rich her dress--and how haughtily
beautiful she looked as she reclined upon the sofa! [she was in fact
busy conning over the new opera, which was to come out the next
evening.] And the Earl of Dreddlington--there he was, reading,
doubtless, some letter from the king or one of the royal family--a man
of great rank--resplendent in his decorations--all just according to
what he had seen in pictures, and heard and read of--what must that red
ribbon have cost? Ay, indeed, poor Lord Dreddlington, it had cost you
the labor of half a life of steadfast sycophancy, of watchful
manœuvring, and desperate exertion! And at last, the minister tossed
it to you in a moment of disgust and despair--mortally perplexed by the
conflicting claims of two sulky dukes and a querulous old marquis, each
of whom threatened to withdraw his "_influence and support_," if his
_rival's_ claims were preferred! He had never seen any of such a
breadth.--It must have been manufactured on purpose for the earl! How
white were his hands! And he had an antique massive signet-ring on his
forefinger, and two glittering rings at least on each of his little
fingers--positively Titmouse at length began to regard him almost as a
god:--and yet the amazing thought occurred that this august being was
allied to him by the ties of relationship! Such were the thoughts and
reflections passing through the mind of Titmouse, during the time that
Lord Dreddlington was engaged in reading his letter--and afterwards
during the brief intervals which elapsed between the various
observations addressed to him by his Lordship.

The gentleman in black at length entered the room, and advancing slowly
and noiselessly towards the earl, said in a gentlemanlike manner,
"Dinner, my Lord;" and retired. Into what new scenes of splendid
embarrassment was this the signal for Mr. Titmouse's introduction?
thought our friend, and trembled.

"Mr. Titmouse, will you give your arm to the Lady Cecilia?" said the
earl, motioning him to the sofa. Up jumped Titmouse, and approached
hastily the recumbent beauty; who languidly arose, arranged her train
with one hand, and with the other, having drawn on her glove, just
barely touched the proffered arm of Titmouse, extended towards her at a
very acute angle, and at right angles with his own body--stammering,
"Honor to take your Ladyship--uncommon proud--this way, my Lady." Lady
Cecilia took no more notice of him than if he had been a dumb waiter;
walking beside him in silence--the earl following. To think that a
nobleman of high rank was walking _behind_ him!

Would to heaven, thought the embarrassed Titmouse, that he had two
fronts, one for the earl behind, and the other to be turned full towards
Lady Cecilia! The tall servants, powdered and in light blue liveries,
stood like a guard of honor around the dining-room door. That room was
extensive and lofty: what a solitary sort of state were they about to
dine in! Titmouse felt cold, though it was summer; and trembled as he
followed, rather than led, his haughty partner to her seat; and then was
motioned into his own by the earl, himself sitting down opposite an
antique silver soup tureen! A servant stood behind Lady Cecilia; another
behind Titmouse; and a third on the left of the earl; while on his
right, between his Lordship and the glistening sideboard, stood a portly
gentleman in black, with a bald head and--Titmouse thought--a somewhat
haughty countenance. Though Titmouse had touched nothing since
breakfast, he felt not the slightest inclination to eat, and would have
given the world to have dared to say as much, and be at once relieved
from a vast deal of anxiety. Is it indeed easy to conceive of a
fellow-creature in a state of more complete thraldom, at that moment,
than poor little Titmouse? A little animal under the suddenly exhausted
receiver of an air-pump, or a fish just plucked out of its own element,
and flung gasping and struggling upon the grass, may serve to assist
your conceptions of the position and sufferings of Mr. Titmouse. The
earl, who was on the look-out for it, observed his condition with secret
but complete satisfaction; here he beheld the legitimate effect of rank
and state upon the human mind. Titmouse got through the soup--of which
about half a dozen spoonfuls only were put into his plate--pretty
fairly. Anywhere else than at Lord Dreddlington's, Titmouse would have
thought it poor, thin, watery stuff, with a few green things chopped up
and swimming in it; but now he perceived that it had a sort of superior
flavor. How some red mullet, enclosed in paper, puzzled poor Titmouse,
is best known to himself.

"The Lady Cecilia will take wine with you, Mr. Titmouse, I dare say,
by-and-by," observed the earl, blandly; and in a moment's time, but with
perfect deliberation, the servants poured wine into the two glasses.
"Your Ladyship's health, my Lady"--faltered Titmouse. She slightly
bowed, and a faint smile glimmered at the corners of her mouth--but
unobserved by Titmouse.

"I think you said, Mr. Titmouse," quoth the earl, some time afterwards,
"that you had not yet taken possession of Yatton?"

"No, my Lord; but I go down the day after to-morrow--quite--if I may say
it, my Lord--quite in style"--answered Titmouse, with humble and
hesitating jocularity of manner.

"Ha, ha!"--exclaimed the earl, gently.

"Had you any acquaintance with the Aubreys, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired the
Lady Cecilia.

"No, my Lady--yes, your Ladyship, (I beg your Ladyship's pardon)--but,
now I think of it, I had a slight acquaintance with Miss Aubrey."
[Titmouse, Titmouse, you little wretch, how dare you say so?]

"She is considered pretty in the country, I believe," drawled Lady
Cecilia, languidly.

"Oh, most uncommon lovely!--_middling_, only middling, my Lady, I should
say"--added Titmouse, suddenly; having observed, as he fancied, rather a
displeased look in Lady Cecilia. He had begun his sentence with more
energy than he had yet shown in the house; he finished it hastily, and
colored as he spoke--feeling that he had, somehow or another, committed
himself.

"Do you form a new establishment at Yatton, sir?" inquired the earl, "or
take to any part of that of your predecessor?"

"I have not, please your Lordship, made up my mind yet exactly--should
like to know your Lordship's opinion."

"Why, sir, I should be governed by circumstances--by circumstances, sir;
when you get there, sir, you will be better able to judge of the course
you should pursue." Titmouse made an humble obeisance.

"Do you intend, Mr. Titmouse, to live in town, or in the country?"
inquired Lady Cecilia.

"A little of both, my Lady--but mostly in town; because, as your
Ladyship sees, the country is _devilish_ dull--'pon my life, my Lady--my
Lord--beg a thousand pardons," he suddenly added, bowing to both, and
blushing violently. Here he _had_ committed himself, and awfully; but
his august companions bowed to him very kindly, and he presently
recovered his self-possession.

"Are you fond of hunting, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired the earl.

"Why, my Lord, can't exactly say that I am--but your Lordship sees,
cases alter circumstances, and when I get down there among the country
gents, p'r'aps I may do as they do, my Lord."

"I presume, Mr. Titmouse, you have scarcely chosen a town residence
yet?" inquired Lady Cecilia.

"No, my Lady--not fixed it yet--was thinking of taking Mr. Aubrey's
house in Grosvenor Street, understanding it is to be sold;" then turning
towards the earl--"because, as your Lordship sees, I was thinking of
getting into _both_ the nests of the old birds, while both are warm"--he
added with a very faint smile.

"Exactly; yes--I see, sir--I understand you," replied Lord Dreddlington,
sipping his wine. His manner rather discomposed Titmouse, to whom it
then very naturally occurred that the earl might be warmly attached to
the Aubreys, and not relish their being spoken of so lightly; so
Titmouse hastily and anxiously added--"Your Lordship sees I was most
_particular_ sorry to make the Aubreys turn out. A most uncommon
respectable gent, Mr. Aubrey: I assure your Lordship I think so."

"I had not the honor of his acquaintance, sir," replied the earl,
coldly, and with exceeding stiffness, which flustered Titmouse not a
little; and a pause occurred in the conversation for nearly a minute.
Dinner had now considerably advanced, and Titmouse was beginning to grow
a _little_ familiar with the routine of matters. Remembering Gammon's
caution concerning the wine, and also observing how very little was
drunk by the earl and Lady Cecilia, Titmouse did the same; and during
the whole of dinner had scarcely four full glasses of wine.

"How long is it," inquired the earl, addressing his daughter, "since the
Aubreys took that house?" Lady Cecilia could not say. "Stay--now I
recollect--surely it was just before my appointment to the Household.
Yes; it was about that time, I now recollect. I am alluding, Mr.
Titmouse," continued the earl, addressing him in a very gracious manner,
"to an appointment under the Crown of some little distinction, which I
was solicited to accept at the personal instance of his Majesty, on the
occasion of our party coming into power--I mean that of Lord Steward of
the Household."

"Dear me, my Lord! Indeed! Only to think, your Lordship!" exclaimed
Titmouse, with such a profound deference in his manner as encouraged the
earl to proceed.

"That, sir, was an office of great importance, and I had some hesitation
in undertaking its responsibility. But, sir, when I had once committed
myself to my sovereign and my country, I resolved to give them my best
services. I had formed plans for effecting very extensive alterations,
sir, in that department of the public service, which I have no doubt
would have given great satisfaction to the country, as soon as the
nature of my intentions became generally understood; when faction, sir,
unfortunately prevailed, and we were compelled to relinquish office."

"Dear me, my Lord! How particular sorry I am to hear it, my Lord!"
exclaimed Titmouse, as he gazed at the baffled statesman with an
expression of respectful sympathy.

"Sir, it gives me sincere satisfaction," said the earl, after a pause,
"to hear that our political opinions agree"----

"Oh yes! my Lord, quite; _sure_ of that"----

"I assure you, sir, that some little acquaintance with the genius and
spirit of the British constitution has satisfied me that this country
can never be safely or advantageously governed except on sound Whig
principles."--He paused.

"Yes, my Lord; it's quite true, your Lordship"--interposed Titmouse,
reverentially.

"That, sir, is the only way I know of, by which aristocratic
institutions can be brought to bear effectively upon, to blend
harmoniously with the interests of the lower orders--_the people_, Mr.
Titmouse." Titmouse thought this wonderfully fine, and sat listening as
to an oracle of political wisdom. The earl, observing it, began to form
a much higher opinion of his little kinsman. "The unfortunate gentleman,
your predecessor at Yatton, sir, if he had but allowed himself to have
been guided by those who had mixed in public affairs before he was
born," said the earl, with great dignity----

"'Pon my word, my Lord, he was, I've heard, a d--d Tory!--Oh my Lady! my
Lord! humbly beg pardon," he added, turning pale; but the fatal word had
been uttered, and heard by both; and he felt as if he could have sunk
through the floor.

"Shall I have the honor of taking another glass of wine with you, sir?"
inquired the earl, rather gravely and severely, as if wishing Mr.
Titmouse fully to appreciate the fearful breach of etiquette of which he
had just been guilty, by swearing in such a presence. After they had
bowed to each other, a very awkward pause occurred, which was at length
broken by the considerate Lady Cecilia.

"Are you fond of the opera, Mr. Titmouse?"

"Very, my Lady--most particular," replied Titmouse, who had been there
once only.

"Do you prefer the opera, or the ballet? I mean the music or the
dancing?"

"Oh I understand your Ladyship. 'Pon my word, my Lady, I prefer them
both. The dancing is most uncommon superior; though I must say, my Lady,
the lady dancers there do most uncommonly--_rather_, I should say"--He
stopped abruptly; his face flushed, and he felt as if he had burst into
a perspiration. What the deuce was he about? It seemed as if some devil
within were urging him on, from time to time, to commit himself. Good
gracious! another word, and out would have come his opinion as to the
shocking indecency of the ballet!

"I understand you, sir; I quite agree with you," said Lady Cecilia,
calmly; "the ballet _does_ come on at a sad late hour; I often wish they
would now and then have the ballet first."

"'Pon my life, my Lady," quoth Titmouse, eagerly snatching at the plank
which had been thrown to him; "that _is_ what I meant--nothing else,
upon my soul, your Ladyship!"

"Do you intend taking a box there, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired her Ladyship,
with an appearance of interest in the expected answer.

"Why, your Ladyship, they say a box there is a _precious_ long
figure;--but in course, my Lady, when I've got to rights a little with
my property--your Ladyship understands--I shall do the correct thing."

Here a very long pause ensued. How dismally quiet and deliberate was
everything! The very servants, how noiselessly they waited! Everything
done just when it was wanted, yet no hurry, or bustle, or noise; and
they looked so composed--so much at their ease. He fancied that they had
scarce anything else to do than look at him, and watch all his
movements; which greatly embarrassed him, and he began to _hate_ them.
He tried hard to inspirit himself with a reflection upon his own
suddenly acquired and really great personal importance; absolute master
of Ten Thousand a-Year, a relation of the great man at whose table he
sat, and whose hired servants they were; but then his timorously raised
eye would light, for an instant, upon the splendid _insignia_ of the
earl; and he felt as oppressed as ever. What would he not have given for
a few minutes' interval, and sense of complete freedom and independence?
And were these to be his feelings ever hereafter? Was this the sort of
tremulous apprehension of offence, and embarrassment as to his every
move, to which he was to be doomed in high life? Oh that he had but been
_born_ to it, like the earl and the Lady Cecilia!

"Were you ever in the House of Lords, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Lord
Dreddlington, suddenly, after casting about for some little time for a
topic on which he might converse with Titmouse.

"No, my Lord, never--should most uncommon like to see it, my
Lord"--replied Titmouse, eagerly.

"Certainly, it is an impressive spectacle, sir, and well worth seeing,"
said the earl, solemnly.

"I suppose, my Lord, your Lordship goes there every day?"

"Why, sir, I believe _I am_ pretty punctual in my attendance. I was
there to-day, sir, till the House rose. Sir, I am of opinion that
hereditary legislators--a practical anomaly in a free state like
this--but one which has innumerable unperceived advantages to recommend
it--Sir, our country expects at our hands, in discharge of so grave a
trust--in short, if we were not to be true to--we who are in a peculiar
sense the guardians of public liberty--if we were once to betray our
trust--Let me trouble you sir, for a little of that----," said the earl,
using some foreign word which Titmouse had never heard of before, and
looking towards a delicately constructed fabric, as of compressed snow,
which stood before Titmouse. A servant was in a twinkling beside him,
with his Lordship's plate. Ah me! that I should have to relate so sad an
event as presently occurred to Titmouse! He took a spoon; and, imagining
the glistening fabric before him to be as solid as it looked, brought to
bear upon it an adequate degree of force, even as if he had been going
to scoop out a piece of Stilton cheese--and inserting his spoon at the
summit of the snowy and deceitful structure, souse to the bottom went
spoon, hand, coat-cuff, and all, and a very dismal noise evidenced that
the dish on which the aforesaid spoon had descended, with so much
force--was no longer a dish. It was, in fact, broken in halves, and the
liquid from within, ran about on the cloth.... A cluster of servants was
quickly around him.... A mist came over his eyes; the color deserted his
cheek; and he had a strange feeling, as if verily the end of all things
was at hand.

"I beg you will think nothing of it--for it really signifies nothing at
all, Mr. Titmouse," said the earl, kindly, observing his agitation.

"Oh dear! oh my Lord--your Ladyship--what an _uncommon_ stupid ass!"
faltered Titmouse.

"Pray _don't_ distress yourself, Mr. Titmouse," said Lady Cecilia,
really feeling for his evident misery, "or you will distress _us_."

"I beg--humbly beg pardon--please your Lordship--your Ladyship. I'll
replace it with the best in London the very first thing in the morning."
Here the servant beside him, who was arranging the table-cloth, uttered
a faint sound of suppressed laughter, which disconcerted Titmouse still
more.

"Give yourself no concern--'tis only a _trifle_, Mr. Titmouse!--You
understand, ha, ha?" said the earl, kindly.

"But if your Lordship will only allow me--expense is no object. I know
the very best shop in Oxford Street."

"Suppose we take a glass of champagne together, Mr. Titmouse?" said the
earl, rather peremptorily; and Titmouse had sense enough to be aware
that he was to drop the subject. It was a good while before he recovered
even the little degree of self-possession which he had had since first
entering Lord Dreddlington's house. He had afterwards no very distinct
recollection of the manner in which he got through the rest of dinner,
but a general sense of his having been treated with the most kind and
delicate forbearance--no _fuss_ made. Suppose such an accident had
occurred at Satin Lodge, or even Alibi House!

Shortly after the servants had withdrawn, Lady Cecilia rose to retire.
Titmouse, seeing the earl approaching the bell, anticipated him in
ringing it, and then darted to the door with the speed of a lamplighter
to open it, as he did, just before a servant had raised his hand to it
on the outside. Then he stood within, and the servant without, each
bowing, and Lady Cecilia passed between them with stately step, her eyes
fixed upon the ground, and her lip compressed with the effort to check
her inclination to a smile--perhaps, even laughter. Titmouse was now
left alone with Lord Dreddlington; and, on resuming his seat, most
earnestly renewed his entreaties to be allowed to replace the dish
which he had broken, assuring Lord Dreddlington that "money was no
object at all." He was encountered, however, with so stern a negative by
his Lordship, that, with a hurried apology, he dropped the subject; but
the earl very good-naturedly added that he had perceived the _joke_
intended by Mr. Titmouse--which was certainly a very good one! This
would have set off poor Titmouse again; but a glance at the face of his
magnificent host sealed his lips.

"I have heard it said, Mr. Titmouse," presently commenced the earl,
"that you have been engaged in mercantile pursuits during the period of
your exclusion from the estates which you have just recovered. Is it so,
sir?"

"Ye-e-e-s--sir--my Lord"--replied Titmouse, hastily considering whether
or not he should altogether _sink the shop_; but he dared hardly venture
upon so very decisive a lie--"I was, please your Lordship, in one of the
greatest establishments in the mercery line in London--at the west end,
my Lord; most confidential, my Lord; management of everything; but,
somehow, my Lord, I never _took to it_--always felt a cut above it--your
Lordship understands?"

"Perfectly, sir; I can quite appreciate your feelings. But, sir, the
mercantile interests of this great country are not to be
overlooked!--Those who are concerned in them, are frequently respectable
persons."

"Begging pardon, my Lord--no, they a'n't--if your Lordship only knew
them as well as I do, my Lord. Most uncommon low people. Do anything to
turn a penny, my Lord; and often sell damaged goods for best."

"It is very possible, sir, that there may exist irregularities,
_eccentricities_, ha! ha! of that description; but upon the whole, sir,
I am disposed to think that there are many very decent persons engaged
in trade. I have had the happiness, sir, to assist in passing measures
that were calculated, by removing restrictions and protective duties, to
secure to this country the benefits of free and universal competition.
We have been proceeding, sir, for many years, on altogether a wrong
principle--that of protecting native industry and enterprise; but, not
to follow out this matter farther, I must remind you, sir, that your
acquaintance with the principles and leading details of mercantile
transactions--undoubtedly one of the mainsprings of the national
greatness--may hereafter be of use to you, sir."

"Yes, my Lord, 'pon my soul--when I'm furnishing my houses in town and
country, I mean to go to market myself--please your Lordship, I know a
trick or two of the trade, and can't be taken in, my Lord. For instance,
my Lord, there's Tag-rag--a-hem! hem!" he paused abruptly, and looked
somewhat confusedly at the earl.

"I did not mean _that_ exactly," said his Lordship, unable to resist a
smile. "Pray, fill your glass, Mr. Titmouse." He did so. "You are of
course aware that you have the absolute patronage of the borough of
Yatton, Mr. Titmouse?--It occurs to me, that as our political opinions
agree, and unless I am presumptuous, sir, in so thinking--I may be
regarded, in a political point of view, as the head of the family--you
understand me, I hope, Mr. Titmouse?"

"Exactly, my Lord--'pon my soul, it's all correct, my Lord."

"Well--then, sir, the family interests, Mr. Titmouse, must be looked
after"----

"Oh! in course, my Lord, only too happy--certainly, my Lord, we shall, I
hope, make a very _interesting_ family, if your Lordship so pleases--I
_can_ have no objection, my Lord!"

"It was a vile, a disgraceful trick, by which Ministers popped in their
own man for our borough, Mr. Titmouse."

[Lord Dreddlington alluded to the circumstance of a new writ having been
moved for, immediately on Mr. Aubrey's acceptance of the Chiltern
Hundreds, and, before the Opposition could be prepared for such a step,
sent down, without delay, to Yatton, and Sir Percival Pickering, Bart.,
of Luddington Court, an intimate friend of Mr. Aubrey's, and a keen
unflinching Tory, being returned as member, before the Titmouse
influence could be brought for even one moment into the field; the few
and willing electors of that ancient and loyal borough being only too
happy to have the opportunity of voting for a man whose principles they
approved--probably the last they would have of doing so.]

"Yes, my Lord--Sir What-d'ye-call-him _was_ a trifle too sharp for us,
in that business, wasn't he?"

"It has succeeded, sir, for the moment, but"--continued his Lordship, in
a very significant and stately manner--"it is quite possible that their
triumph may be of very short duration--Mr. Titmouse. Those who, like
myself, are at headquarters--let me see you fill your glass, Mr.
Titmouse.--I have the honor to congratulate you, sir, on the recovery of
your rights, and to wish you health and long life in the enjoyment of
them," quoth the earl, with an air of the loftiest urbanity.

"May it please your Lordship, your Lordship's most uncommon
polite"--commenced Titmouse, rising and standing while he spoke--for he
had had experience enough of society, to be aware that when a
gentleman's health is drunk on important occasions, it becomes him to
rise and acknowledge the compliment in such language as he can
command--"and am particularly proud--a--a--I beg to propose, my Lord,
your Lordship's very _superior_ good health, and many thanks." Then he
sat down; each poured out another glass of claret, and Titmouse drank
his off.

"It is extremely singular, sir," said the earl, musingly, after a
considerable pause, "the reverses in life that one hears of!"

[I cannot help pausing, for a moment, to suggest--what must have become
of the earl and his daughter, had they been placed in the situation of
the unfortunate Aubreys?]

"Yes, my Lord, your Lordship's quite true, 'pon my word!--Most uncommon
_ups_ and _downs!_ Lord, my Lord, only to fancy _me_, a few months ago,
trotting up and down Oxford Street with my yard mea"----He stopped
short, and colored violently.

"Well, sir," replied the earl, with an expression of bland and dignified
sympathy--"however humble might have been your circumstances, it is a
consolation to reflect that _the Fates ordained it_. Sir, there is
nothing dishonorable in being poor, when--you cannot help it! Reverses
of fortune, sir, have happened to some of the greatest characters in our
history. You remember Alfred, sir?" Titmouse bowed assentingly; but had
he been questioned, could have told, I suspect, as little about the
matter--as the earl himself.

"Allow me, sir, to ask whether you have come to any arrangement with
your late opponent concerning the back-rents?" inquired the earl, with a
great appearance of interest.

"No, my Lord, not yet; but my solicitors say they'll soon _have the
screw on_, please your Lordship--that's just what they say--their very
words."

"Indeed, sir!" replied the earl, gravely. "What is the sum to which they
say you are entitled, sir?"

"Sixty thousand pounds, my Lord, at least--quite set me up at starting,
my Lord--won't it?" replied Titmouse, with great glee; but the earl
shuddered involuntarily for a moment, and sipped his wine in silence.

"By the way, Mr. Titmouse," said he, after a considerable pause--"I
trust you will forgive me for suggesting whether it would not be a
prudent step for you to go to one of the universities, for at least a
twelvemonth."

"Humbly begging your Lordship's pardon, am not I too old? I've heard
they're all a pack of overgrown schoolboys there--and learn nothing but
a bit of some old languages that a'n't the least use now-a-days, seeing
it a'n't _spoke_ now, anywhere"--replied Titmouse--"Besides, I've talked
the thing over with Mr. Gammon, my Lord"----

"Mr. Gammon? Allow me, sir, to ask who that may be?"

"One of my solicitors, my Lord; a most remarkable clever man, and an
out-and-out lawyer, my Lord. It was he that found out all about my case,
my Lord. If your Lordship was only to see him for a moment, your
Lordship would say what a _remarkable_ clever man that is!"

"You will forgive my curiosity, sir--but it must have surely required
very ample means to have carried on so arduous a lawsuit as that which
has just terminated so successfully?"

"Oh yes, my Lord!--Quirk, Gammon, and Snap did all that; and, between me
and your Lordship, I suppose I shall have to come down a pretty long
figure, all on the _nail_, as your Lordship understands; but I mean them
to get it all out of that respectable gent, Mr. Aubrey!"--By quietly
pressing his questions, the earl got a good deal more from Titmouse than
he was aware of, concerning Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and in
doing so, conceived a special dislike for Gammon. The earl gave him some
pretty decisive hints about the necessity of being on his guard with
such people--and hoped that he would not commit himself to anything
important without consulting his Lordship, who would of course give him
the advantage of his experience in the affairs of the world, and open
his eyes to the designs of those whose only object was to make a prey of
him. Titmouse began to feel that here, at length, he had met with a
_real_ friend--one whose suggestions were worthy of being received with
the profoundest deference. Soon afterwards, he had the good fortune to
please the earl, beyond expression, by venturing timidly to express his
admiration of the splendid ribbon worn by his Lordship; who took the
opportunity of explaining that and the other marks of distinction he
wore, and others which he was entitled to wear, at great length and with
much minuteness--so that he at length caused Titmouse to believe that
he, Lord Dreddlington--the august head of the family--must have rendered
more signal service, somehow or other, to his country, and also done
more to win the admiration and gratitude of foreign countries, than most
men of former or present times. His Lordship might not, perhaps, have
intended it; but he went on till he had almost DEIFIED himself in the
estimation of his little listener!--One very natural question was
perpetually trembling on the tip of Titmouse's tongue; viz. how and when
he could get such things for _himself_.

"Well, Mr. Titmouse," at length observed the earl, after looking at his
watch--"shall we adjourn to the drawing-room? The fact is, sir, that
Lady Cecilia and I have an evening engagement at the Duchess of
Diamond's. I much regret being unable to take you with us, sir; but, as
it is, shall we rejoin the Lady Cecilia?" continued his Lordship,
rising. Up jumped Titmouse; and the earl and he were soon in the
drawing-room; where, besides the Lady Cecilia, sat another lady, to whom
he was not introduced in any way. This was Miss Macspleuchan, a distant
connection of the earl's late countess--a very poor relation, who had
entered the house of the Earl of Dreddlington, in order to eat the
bitter, bitter bread of dependence. Poor soul! you might tell, by a
glance at her, that she had not thriven upon it. She was about thirty,
and so thin! She was dressed in plain white muslin; and there was a
manifest constraint and timidity about her motions, and a depression in
her countenance; whose lineaments showed that if she could have been
happy, she might have appeared handsome. She had a most ladylike air;
and there was thought in her brow and acuteness in her eye, which
however, as it were, habitually watched the motions of the earl and the
Lady Cecilia, with deference and anxiety. Poor Miss Macspleuchan felt
herself gradually sinking into a sycophant; the alternative being
_that_, or starvation. She was very accomplished, particularly in music
and languages, while the Lady Cecilia really knew scarcely anything--for
which reason, principally, she had long ago conceived a bitter dislike
to Miss Macspleuchan, and inflicted on her a number of petty but
exquisite mortifications and indignities; such, perhaps, as none but a
sensitive soul could fully appreciate; for the earl and his daughter
were exemplary persons in the proprieties of life, and would not do such
things _openly_. She was a sort of companion of Lady Cecilia, and
entirely dependent upon her and the earl for her subsistence. She was
sitting on the sofa beside Lady Cecilia, when Titmouse re-entered the
drawing-room; and the latter eyed him through her glass with infinite
_nonchalance_, even when he had advanced to within a few feet of her. He
made Miss Macspleuchan, as she rose to take her seat and prepare tea, a
most obsequious bow. Absurd as was the style of its performance, she saw
that there was politeness in the intention; 'twas moreover a courtesy
towards herself, that was unusual from the earl's guests; and these
considerations served to take off the edge of the ridicule and contempt
with which Lady Cecilia had been preparing her to receive their
newly-discovered kinsman. After standing for a second or two near the
sofa, Titmouse ventured to sit himself down upon it--on the very edge
only--as if afraid of disturbing Lady Cecilia, who was reclining on it
with an air of languid hauteur.

"So you're going, my Lady, to a dance to-night, as my Lord says?" quoth
Titmouse, respectfully; "hope your Ladyship will enjoy yourself!"

"We regret that you do not accompany us, Mr. Titmouse," said Lady
Cecilia, slightly inclining towards him, and glancing at Miss
Macspleuchan with a faint and bitter smile.

"Should have been most uncommon proud to have gone, please your
Ladyship," replied Titmouse, as a servant brought him a cup of tea.
"These cups and saucers, my Lady, come from abroad, I suppose? Now, I
dare say, though they've _rather_ a funny look, they cost a good deal?"

"I really do not know, sir; I believe we have had them some time."

"'Pon my life, my Lady, I like them amazing!" Seeing her Ladyship not
disposed to talk, Titmouse became silent.

"Are you fond of music, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired the earl, presently;
observing that the pause in the conversation had become embarrassing to
Titmouse.

"Very, indeed, my Lord; is your Lordship?"

"I am rather fond of _vocal_ music, sir--of the opera."

This the earl said, because Miss Macspleuchan played upon the piano very
brilliantly, and did not sing. Miss Macspleuchan understood him.

"Do you play upon any instrument, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Lady Cecilia,
with a smile lurking about her lips, which increased a little when
Titmouse replied in the negative;--but added that, he had once begun to
learn the _clarionet_ some years before, but could not manage the notes.
"Excuse me, my Lady, but what an uncommon fine piano that is!" said
he.--"If I may make so bold, will your Ladyship give us a tune?"

"I dare say Miss Macspleuchan will play for you, Mr. Titmouse, if you
wish it," replied Lady Cecilia, coldly.

Some time afterwards, a servant announced to her Ladyship and the earl
that the carriage was at the door; and presently they both retired to
their dressing-rooms to make some slight alteration in their dress;--the
earl to add an order or two, and Lady Cecilia to place upon her haughty
brow a small tiara of brilliants. As soon as they had thus retired--"I
shall feel great pleasure, sir, in playing for you, if you wish it,"
said Miss Macspleuchan, in a voice of such mingled melancholy and
kindness as must have gone to Titmouse's heart, had he possessed one. He
jumped up, and bowed profoundly. She sat down to the piano, and played
with great ease and brilliancy such music as she supposed would suit her
auditor--namely, waltzes and marches--till the door opened, and Lady
Cecilia reappeared drawing on her gloves, with the glittering addition
which I have mentioned--followed presently by the earl.

"Well, sir," said he, with dignified affability, "I need not repeat how
highly gratified I feel at our introduction to each other. I trust you
will henceforth consider yourself no stranger here"----

"Oh, 'pon my life, my Lord! your Lordship's most particular polite!"
exclaimed Titmouse, in a low tone, and with a sudden and profound bow.

"And that on your return from Yorkshire," continued the earl, drawing on
his gloves, "you will let us see you: we both feel great interest in
your good fortunes. Sir, I have the honor to wish you a good evening!"
He extended his gloved hand to his distinguished little kinsman, whose
hand, however, he touched with little more than the ends of his fingers.

"We exceedingly regret that we must leave you, Mr. Titmouse," said Lady
Cecilia, with forced seriousness; "but as we wish to leave the duchess's
early, in order to go to another ball, we must _go_ early. Good-evening,
sir," and having dropped him a slight formal courtesy, she quitted the
drawing-room followed by the earl, Titmouse making four or five such
bows as provoked a smile from all who witnessed them. The next moment he
was alone with Miss Macspleuchan. Her unaffected, good-natured address
made him feel more at home within the next five minutes, than he had
been since entering that frigid scene of foolish state--since being in
the oppressive presence of the greatness just departed. She felt at
first a contempt for him bordering upon disgust, but which very soon
melted into pity. What a wretched creature was _this_ to be put into
such a dazzling position! What might be the design of Providence in
placing such a being in the possession of such wealth and rank, at the
expense of the virtuous Aubreys?

Titmouse soon got pretty communicative with Miss Macspleuchan, and told
her about the Tag-rags, Miss Tag-rag, and Miss Quirk, both of whom were
absolutely dying of love for him, and thought he was in love with them,
which was not the case--far from it. Then he hinted something about a
most particular uncommon lovely gal that had his heart, and he hoped to
have hers, as soon as he had got all to rights at Yatton. Then he
described the splendid style in which he was going down to take
possession of his estates. Having finished this, he told her that he had
been the morning before to see a man hanged for murdering his wife; that
he had been into the condemned cell, and then into the press-room, and
had seen his hands and arms tied, and shaken hands with him; and he was
going into such a sickening minuteness of detail, that to avoid it Miss
Macspleuchan, who felt both shocked and disgusted, suddenly asked him if
he was fond of heraldry; and rising from the sofa, she went into the
second room, where, on an elegant and antique stand, lay a huge roll of
parchment, on a gilded stick, splendidly mounted and most superbly
illuminated,--it was about three-quarters of a yard in breadth, and some
ten or twenty feet in length. This was the _Pedigree of the
Dreddlingtons_. She was giving him an account of Simon de Drelincourt,
an early ancestor of the earl's, who had come over with William the
Conqueror, and performed stupendous feats of valor at the battle of
Hastings, Titmouse listening in open-mouthed awe, and almost trembling
to think that he had broken a valuable dish belonging to a nobleman who
had such wonderful ancestors; not, at the moment, adverting to the
circumstance that he was himself descended from the very same ancestors,
and had as rich blood in him as the earl and Lady Cecilia--when a
servant entered and informed him in a whisper that "his carriage had
arrived." He considered that etiquette required him to depart
immediately.

"Beg your pardon; but if ever you should come down to my estate in the
country, shall be most uncommon proud to see your Ladyship."

"I beg your pardon; you are mistaken, sir," interrupted Miss
Macspleuchan, hastily, and blushing scarlet; the fact being that
Titmouse had not caught her name on its having been once or twice
pronounced by Lady Cecilia; and very naturally concluded that she also
must be a lady of rank. Titmouse was, however, so occupied with his
efforts to make a graceful exit, that he did not catch the explanation
of his mistake; and, bowing almost down to the ground, reached the
landing, where the tall servant, with a very easy grace, gave him his
hat and cane, and preceded him down-stairs. As he descended, he felt in
his pockets for some loose silver, and gave several shillings between
the servants who stood in the hall to witness his departure; after
which, one of them having opened the door and gently let down the steps
of the glass-coach, Titmouse popped into it.

"Home, sir?" inquired the servant, as he closed the door.

"The Cabbage-Stalk Hotel, Covent Garden," replied Titmouse, with an
affected drawl.

His answer was communicated to the coachman, who thereupon addressed a
sharp argument to the brace of meek and skinny horses, standing with
downcast heads before him--which they lifted up--then they got into
motion--and away rumbled the glass-coach. As soon as its distinguished
inmate had become calm enough to reflect upon the events of the evening,
he came to the conclusion that the Earl of Dreddlington was a very great
man indeed; the Lady Cecilia very beautiful, but rather proud; and Miss
Macspleuchan (Lady Somebody, as he supposed) one of the most interesting
ladies whom he had ever met with; that there was something _uncommon_
pleasing about her: in short, he felt a sort of grateful attachment
towards her; but how long it would have lasted after his hearing that
she was only a plain miss, and a poor relation, I leave the acute reader
to conjecture.




CHAPTER VI.


Mr. Gammon was with Titmouse about half-past nine o'clock the next
morning, not a little anxious to hear how that young gentleman had got
on over-night; but met with a totally different reception from any that
he had before experienced.

He imagined for a few minutes that Lord Dreddlington had been _pumping_
Titmouse; had learned from him his position with respect to Gammon, in
particular; and had injected distrust and suspicion into the mind of
Titmouse, concerning him. But Gammon, with all his acuteness, was quite
mistaken. The truth was, 'twas only an attempt on the part of poor
Titmouse to assume the composed demeanor, the languid elegance, which he
had observed in the distinguished personages with whom he had spent the
preceding evening, and which had made a very deep impression on his
little mind. He drawled out his words, looked as if he were half asleep,
and continually addressed Gammon as "Sir," and "Mr. Gammon," just as the
Earl of Dreddlington had constantly addressed him--Titmouse. Our friend
was sitting at breakfast, on the present occasion, in a most gaudy
dressing-gown, and with the newspaper before him; in short, his personal
appearance and manner were totally different from what Gammon had ever
previously witnessed; and he looked now and then at Titmouse, as if for
a moment doubting his identity. Whether or not he was now on the point
of throwing overboard those who had piloted him from amid the shoals of
poverty into the open sea of affluence, shone upon by the vivid
sunlight of rank and distinction, Gammon did not know; but he contracted
his brow, and assumed a certain sternness and peremptoriness of tone and
bearing, which were not long in reducing Titmouse to his proper
dimensions; and when at length Mr. Gammon entered upon the delightful
subject of the morrow's expedition, telling him that he, Gammon, had now
nearly completed all the preparations for going down to, and taking
possession of Yatton in a style of suitable splendor, according to the
wish of Titmouse--this quickly melted away the thin coating of
mannerism, and Titmouse was "himself again." He immediately gave Mr.
Gammon a full account of what had happened at Lord Dreddlington's, and,
I fear, of a great deal more, which _might_, possibly, have happened,
but certainly _had_ not, _e. g._ his Lordship's special laudation of Mr.
Gammon as a "monstrous fine lawyer," which Titmouse swore were the very
exact words of his Lordship, who "would have been most happy to see Mr.
Gammon," and a good deal to the like effect. Also that he--Titmouse--had
been "most uncommon thick" with "Lady Cicely," (so he pronounced her
name;) and that both she and Lord Dreddlington had "pressed him very
hard to go with them to a ball _at a duke's_!" He made no mention of the
broken trifle-dish; said they had nearly a dozen servants to wait on
them, and that there were twenty different sorts of wine, and no end of
courses, at dinner. That the earl wore a star, and garter, and
ribbons--which Gammon erroneously thought as apocryphal as the rest; and
had told him that he--Titmouse--might one day wear them, and sit in the
House of Lords; and had, moreover, advised him most strenuously to get
into Parliament as soon as possible, as the "cause of the people wanted
strengthening." [As Lord Coke, somewhere says, in speaking of a spurious
portion of the text of Lyttleton, "_that arrow came never out of
Lyttleton's_ _quiver_"--so Gammon instantly perceived that the last
sentence came never out of Titmouse's own head, but came plainly marked
as that of a wise and able man and statesman.]

As soon as Titmouse had finished his little romance, Gammon proceeded to
the chief object of his visit--their next day's journey. He said that he
much regretted to inform Titmouse that Mr. Snap had expressed a very
anxious wish to witness the triumph of Mr. Titmouse; and that unless he
had some particular objection--"Oh none, 'pon honor!--poor
Snap!--devilish good chap in a small way!" said Titmouse, in a most
condescending manner, and at once gave his consent--Gammon informing him
that Mr. Snap would be obliged to return to town by the next day's
coach. The reader will smile when I tell him, and if a lady, will frown
when she hears, that Miss Quirk was to be of the party--a point which
her anxious father had secured some time before. Mrs. Alias had declared
that she saw no objection, as Mr. Quirk would be constantly with his
daughter, and Gammon had appeared most ready to bring about so desirable
a result. He had also striven hard, unknown to his partners, to increase
their numbers, by the Tag-rags, who might have gone down, all three of
them, if they had chosen, by coach, and so have returned. Gammon
conceived that this step might not have been unattended with advantage
in several ways; and would, moreover, have secured him a considerable
source of amusement. Titmouse, however, would not listen to the thing
for one moment, and Gammon was forced to give up his little scheme. Two
dashing young fellows, fashionable friends of Titmouse, (who had picked
them up, Heaven only knows where, but they never deserted him,)
infinitely to Gammon's annoyance, were to be of the party. He had seen
them but once, when he had accompanied Titmouse to the play, where they
soon joined him. One was a truly disgusting-looking fellow--a Mr. PIMP
YAHOO--a man about five-and-thirty years old, tall, with a profusion of
black hair parted down the middle of his head, and falling down in long
clustering curls from each temple upon his coat-collar. His whiskers
also were ample, and covered two-thirds of his face, and spread in
disgusting amplitude round his throat. He had also a jet-black tuft--an
imperial--depending from his underlip. He had an execrable eye--full of
insolence and sensuality; in short, his whole countenance bespoke the
thorough debauchee and ruffian. He had been, he said, in the army; and
was nearly connected, according to his own account--as with fellows of
this description is generally the case--with "some of the first families
in the North!" He was now a man of pleasure about town--which contained
not a better billiard-player, as the admiring Titmouse had had several
painful opportunities of judging. He was a great patron of the
ring--knowing all their secrets--all their haunts. He always had plenty
of the money of other people, and drove about in a most elegant cab, in
which Titmouse had often had a seat; and as soon as Mr. Yahoo had
extracted from his communicative little companion all about himself,
that astute gentleman made it his business to conciliate Titmouse's good
graces by all the arts of which he was master--and he succeeded. The
other chosen companion of our friend was Mr. ALGERNON FITZ-SNOOKS; a
complete fool. He was the sole child of a rich tradesman--who had
christened him by the sounding name given above; and afterwards added
the patrician prefix to the surname, which also you see above, in order
to gratify his wife and son. The youth had never "taken to
business"--but was allowed to saunter about, doing, and knowing,
nothing, till about his twenty-second year, when his mother died, as
also a year afterwards did his father, bequeathing to his hopeful son
some fifty thousand pounds--absolutely and uncontrolledly. Mr. Algernon
Fitz-Snooks very judiciously thought that youth was the time to enjoy
life; and before he had reached his thirtieth year, he had got through
all his fortune except about five or six thousand pounds--in return for
which, he had certainly got _something_; viz. an impaired constitution
and a little experience, which _might_, possibly, at some future time,
be useful. He had a pleasing face, regular features, and interesting
eyes; his light hair curled "deliciously;" and he spoke in a sort of
lisp and in a low tone--and, in point of dress, always "turned out"
beautifully. _He_, also, had a cab, and was a great friend of Mr. Yahoo,
who had introduced him into a great deal of high society, principally in
St. James's Street; where both he and Mr. Yahoo had passed a great deal
of their time, especially during the night! There was no intentional
_mischief_ in poor Fitz-Snooks: nature had made him only a fool--his
prudent parents had done the rest; and if he fell into vice, it was only
because--as people say--"he couldn't help it." Such were the chosen
companions of Titmouse; the one a fool, the other a rogue--and "he
_must_," he said, "have them down to the _jollifying_ at Yatton." A
groom and a valet--both impudent knaves, and both newly hired the day
before--would complete the party of the morrow. Gammon assured Titmouse
that he had taken all the pains in the world to get up a triumphant
entry into Yatton; his agents at Grilston, Messrs. Bloodsuck and
Son--the Radical electioneering attorneys of the county--who were well
versed in the matter of processions, bands, flags, &c. &c. &c., had by
that time arranged everything, and they were to be met, when within a
mile of Yatton, by a grand procession. The people at the Hall, also,
were under orders from Mr. Gammon, through Messrs. Bloodsuck and Son, to
have all in readiness--and a banquet prepared for nearly a hundred
persons--in fact, all comers were to be welcome. To all this Titmouse
listened with eyes glistening, and ears tingling with rapture; but can
any tongue describe his emotion, on being apprised that the sum of
£2,500, in the banker's hands, was now at his disposal--that it would be
doubled in a few weeks--and that a check for £500, drawn by Mr. Titmouse
on the London agents of the Grilston bankers, had been honored on the
preceding afternoon? Titmouse's heart beat fast, and he felt as if he
could have worshipped Gammon. As for the matter of carriages, Mr. Gammon
said, that probably Mr. Titmouse would call that morning on Mr. Axle, in
Long Acre, and select one to his mind--it must of course be one with two
seats--and Mr. Gammon had pointed out several which were, he thought,
eligible, and would be shown to Mr. Titmouse. That would be the carriage
in which--he presumed--Mr. Titmouse himself would travel; the second,
Mr. Gammon had taken the liberty of already selecting. With this, Mr.
Gammon (just as the new valet brought in no fewer than a dozen boxes of
cigars ordered over-night by Titmouse) shook his hand and departed,
saying that he should make his appearance at the Cabbage-Stalk the next
morning, precisely at eleven o'clock--about which time it was arranged
they were all to start. Titmouse hardly knew how to contain himself, on
being left alone. About an hour afterwards, he made his appearance at
Mr. Axle's: who, worthy and indefatigable man, carried on two
businesses, one public, _i. e._ that of a coach-builder--one private,
_i. e._ that of a money-lender. He was a rich man--a very obliging and
"accommodating" person, by means of which latter quality he had amassed
a fortune of, it was believed, a hundred thousand pounds. He never made
a fuss about selling on credit--or lending, taking back, or exchanging,
carriages of all descriptions; nor in discounting the bills of his
customers, to any amount. He proved generally right, in each case, in
the long rim. He would supply his fashionable victim with as splendid a
chariot, and funds to keep it some time going, as he or she could
desire; well knowing that in due time, after they should have taken a
few turns in it about the parks, and a few streets and squares in the
neighborhood, it would quietly drive up to one or two huge dingy fabrics
in a different part of the town, where it would deposit its burden, and
then return to its maker very little the worse for wear; who took it
back at about a twentieth part of its cost, and soon again disposed of
it in a way equally advantageous to himself. Mr. Axle showed Mr.
Titmouse very obsequiously over his premises, pointing out (as soon as
he knew who his visitor was,) the carriages which Mr. Gammon had the
day before desired should be shown to him; and which Mr. Titmouse,
with his glass stuck in his eye--where it was kept by the pure force
of muscular contraction--examined with something like the air of a
connoisseur--occasionally rapping with his agate-headed cane--now
against his teeth, then against his legs. He did not seem perfectly
satisfied with any of them; they looked--he said--"devilish plain and
dull."

"Hollo--Mr. Axletree, or whatever your name is--what have we _here_?
'Pon my soul, the very thing!"--he exclaimed, as his eye caught a
splendid object--the state-carriage of the ex-sheriff, with its
gorgeously decorated panels: which, having been vamped up for some six
or seven successive shrievalties--(being on each occasion heralded to
the public by laudatory paragraphs in the newspapers, as entirely new
and signal instances of the taste and magnificence of the
sheriff-elect)--seemed now _perfunctus officio_. Mr. Axle was staggered
for a moment, and scarce supposed Mr. Titmouse to be in earnest--Gammon
having given him no inkling of the real character of Titmouse; but
observing the earnest steadfast gaze with which he regarded the
glittering object, having succeeded in choking down a sudden fit of
laughter, Mr. Axle commenced a most seductive eulogium upon the splendid
structure--remarking on the singularity of the circumstance of its
happening just at that exact moment to be placed at his disposal by its
former owner--a gentleman of great distinction, who had no longer any
occasion for it. Mr. Axle declared that he had had numerous applications
for it already; on hearing which, Titmouse got excited. The door was
opened--he got in; sat on each seat--"Don't it hang beautifully?"
inquired the confident proprietor, testing, by pressure, the elasticity
of the springs, as he spoke.

"Let me see, who was it that was after it yesterday? Oh--I think it was
Sir Fitzbiscuit Gander; but I've not _closed_ with him yet!"

"What's your price, Mr. Axletree?" inquired Titmouse, rather heatedly,
as he got out of the carriage.

After some little higgle-haggling he bought it!!!--for there was nothing
like closing at once, where there was keen competition! Mr.
Gammon--thought Titmouse--could not have seen this beautiful vehicle
when making his choice on the preceding morning! For the rest of the day
he felt infinitely elated at his fortunate purchase; and excited his
imagination by pictures of the astonishment and admiration which his
equipage must call forth on the morrow. Punctual to his appointment, Mr.
Gammon, a few moments before the clock had struck eleven on the ensuing
morning, drew up to the Cabbage-Stalk, as near at least as he could get
to it, in a hackney-coach, with his portmanteau and carpet-bag. I say
as near as he could; for round about the door stood a little crowd,
gazing with a sort of awe on a magnificent vehicle standing there, with
four horses harnessed to it. Gammon looked at his watch, as he entered
the hotel, and asked why the sheriff's carriage was standing at the
door. The waiter to whom he spoke, seemed nearly splitting with
laughter, which almost disabled him from answering that the carriage in
question was that of Mr. Titmouse, ready for setting off for Yorkshire.
Mr. Gammon started back--turned pale, and seemed nearly dropping an
umbrella which was in his hand.

"Mr. Titmouse's!" he echoed incredulously.

"Yes, sir--been here for this hour, at least, packing, such a crowd all
the while; everybody thinks it's the sheriff, sir," replied the waiter,
scarce able to keep his countenance. Mr. Gammon rushed up-stairs with
greater impetuosity than he had perhaps ever been known to exhibit
before, and burst into Mr. Titmouse's room. There was that gentleman,
with his hat on, his hands stuck into his coat-pockets, a cigar in his
mouth, and a tumbler of brandy and water before him. Mr. Yahoo, Mr.
Fitz-Snooks, and Mr. Snap were similarly occupied; and Mr. Quirk was
sitting down with his hands in his pockets, and a glass of negus before
him, with anything but a joyful expression of countenance.

"Is it possible, Mr. Titmouse"----commenced Gammon, almost breathlessly.

"Ah, how d'ye do, Gammon?--punctual!" interrupted Titmouse, extending
his hand.

"Forgive me--but can it be, that the monstrous thing now before the
door, with a crowd grinning around it, is _your carriage_?" inquired
Gammon, with dismay in his face.

"I--rather--think--it _is_," replied Titmouse, slightly disconcerted,
but striving to look self-possessed.

"My _dear_ sir," replied Gammon, in a kind of agony, "it is
_impossible!_ It never can be! Do you mean to say that you bought it at
Mr. Axle's?"

"I should rather think so," replied Titmouse, with a piqued air.

"He's been grossly imposing on you, sir!--Permit me to go at once and
get you a proper vehicle."

"'Pon my life, Mr. Gammon, _I_ think that it's a monstrous nice thing--a
great bargain--and I've bought it and paid for it, that's more."

"Gentlemen, I appeal to _you_," confidently said Gammon, turning in an
agony to Mr. Yahoo and Mr. Fitz-Snooks.

"As for _me_, sir," replied the former, coolly, at the same time
knocking off the ashes from his cigar;--"since you ask my opinion, I
confess I rather like the idea--ha! ha! 'Twill produce a _sensation_;
that's something in this dull life!--Eh, Snooks?"

"Ay--a--I confess I was a little shocked at first, but I think I'm
getting over it now," lisped Mr. Fitz-Snooks, adjusting his
shirt-collar, and then sipping a little of his brandy and water. "I look
upon it, now, as an excellent joke; egad, it beats Chitterfield hollow,
though _he_, too, has done a trick or two lately."

"Did you purchase it as a joke, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Gammon, with
forced calmness, nearly choked with suppressed fury.

"Why--a--'pon my life"--said Titmouse, with a desperate effort to appear
at his ease--"if you ask _me_--wonder you don't see it! Of course I
did!--Those that don't like it may ride, you know, in the other--can't
they? Eh?"

"We shall be hooted at, laughed at, wherever we go," said Mr. Gammon,
vehemently.

"Exactly--that's the _novelty_ I like," said Mr. Yahoo, looking, as he
spoke, at Mr. Gammon with a smile of ineffable insolence.

Mr. Gammon made him no reply, but fixed an eye upon him, under which he
became plainly rather uneasy. He felt outdone. Talk of SCORN!--the eye
of Gammon, settled at that instant upon Mr. Yahoo, was its complete and
perfect representative; and from that moment the wretch Yahoo felt
something like _fear_ of the eye of man, or of _submission_ to it. When,
moreover, he beheld the manner in which Titmouse obeyed Gammon's
somewhat peremptory request to accompany him out of the room for a
moment, he resolved, if possible, to make a friend of Gammon. That
gentleman failed, on being alone with Titmouse, in shaking his
resolution to travel in the splendid vehicle standing at the door.
Titmouse said that he had bought and paid for the carriage; it suited
his taste--and where was the harm of gratifying it? Besides, it was
already packed--all was prepared for starting. Gammon thereupon gave it
up; and, swallowing down his rage as well, and as quickly as he could,
endeavored to reconcile himself to this galling and most unexpected
predicament.

It seemed that Miss Quirk, however really anxious to go down to
Yatton--to do anything, in short, calculated to commit Mr. Titmouse to
her--was quite staggered on discovering, and shocked at seeing, the kind
of persons who were to be their travelling companions. As for Mr. Yahoo,
she recoiled from him with horror at the very first glance. What decent
female, indeed, would not have done so? She had retired to a bedchamber,
soon after entering the Cabbage-Stalk; and, seeing her two unexpected
fellow-travellers, presently sent a chambermaid to request her papa to
come to her.

He found her considerably agitated. She wished earnestly to return to
Alibi House; and consented to proceed on her journey only on the
express promise of Mr. Titmouse and her papa, that no one should be in
the carriage in which she went except her papa and Mr. Gammon--unless,
indeed, Mr. Titmouse should think proper to make himself the fourth.

Mr. Quirk, on this, sent for Mr. Gammon, who, with a somewhat bad grace,
("Confound it!" thought he, "everything seems going wrong,") undertook
to secure Mr. Titmouse's consent to that arrangement.

While Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were closeted together, one of the
waiters entered the room occupied by Mr. Titmouse and his friends, and
informed him that a lad had brought a parcel for him, which he, the
aforesaid lad, had received special orders to deliver into the hands of
Mr. Titmouse. Accordingly there was presently shown into the room a
little knock-kneed lad, in tarnished livery, in whom Titmouse
recollected the boy belonging to Mr. Tag-rag's one-horse chaise; and who
gave a small parcel into Mr. Titmouse's hands, "with Mrs. and Miss
Tag-rag's respectful respects."

As soon as he had quitted the room, "By Jove! What have we here?"
exclaimed Titmouse, just a _little_ flustered as he cut open the string
of the parcel. Inside was a packet wrapped up in white paper, and tied
in a pretty bow, with narrow white satin ribbons. This again, and
another still, within it, having been opened--behold, there stood
exposed to view, three fine cambric pocket-handkerchiefs, each of which,
on being examined, proved to be marked with the initials "T. T." in
_hair_; and Mr. Yahoo happening to unfold one of them, (in so doing,
dropped upon it some of the ashes of his cigar,) lo! in the centre
was--also done in hair--the figure of a heart transfixed with an
arrow!!! Mr. Yahoo roared; and Mr. Fitz-Snooks lisped, "Is she pretty,
Tit? Where's her nest? Any _old_ birds?--eh?"

Titmouse colored a little; then grinned, and put his finger to the side
of his nose, and winked his eye, as if favoring the bright idea of Mr.
Fitz-Snooks. On a sheet of gilt-edged paper, and sealed with a seal
bearing the tender words, "_Forget me not_," was written the following:

     "SIR--Trusting you will excuse the liberty, I send you three best
     cambric pocket-handkerchiefs, which my daughter have marked with
     her own hair, and beg your acceptance of, hoping you may be
     resigned to all the good fortune that may befall you, which is the
     prayer of, dear sir, yours respectfully,

                                                       "MARTHA TAG-RAG.

     "P. S.--My daughter sends what you may please to wish and accept:
     and hope we have the great happiness to see you here again, when
     you return to town from your noble mansion in the country.

       "_Satin Lodge, 18th May 18--._"

"Oh! the naughty old woman! Fie! Fie!" exclaimed Mr. Yahoo, with his
intolerable smile.

"'Pon my soul, there's nothing in it," said Titmouse, reddening.

"Where's Satin Lodge?" lisped Mr. Fitz-Snooks.

"It is a country-house on the--the Richmond road," said Titmouse, with a
little hesitation; and just then the return of Gammon, who had resumed
his usual calmness of manner, relieved him from his embarrassment. Mr.
Gammon had succeeded in effecting the arrangement suggested by Mr. Quirk
and his daughter; and within about a quarter of an hour afterwards,
behold the ex-sheriff's resplendent but cast-off carriage filled by Miss
Quirk and Titmouse, and Mr. Quirk and Gammon--the groom and valet
sitting on the coach-box; while in the other, a plain yellow carriage,
covered with luggage, sat Mr. Yahoo, Mr. Fitz-Snooks, and Mr. Snap, all
of them with lighted cigars--Snap never having been so happy in all his
life as at that moment.

Mr. Titmouse had laid aside his cigar in compliment to Miss Quirk; who
wore a long black veil, and an elegant light shawl, and looked
uncommonly like a young bride setting off--oh, heavens!--thought
she--that it _had_ been so!--on her wedding excursion. Mr. Gammon
slouched his hat over his eyes, and inclined his head downwards, almost
collapsed with vexation and disgust, as he observed the grins and
tittering of the group of spectators gathered round the carriage and
doorway; but Titmouse, who was most splendidly dressed, took off his hat
on sitting down, and bowed several times to--as he supposed--the
admiring crowd.

"Get on, boys!" growled Mr. Gammon; and away they rattled, exciting
equal surprise and applause whereever they went. Whoever had met them,
must have taken Titmouse and Miss Quirk for a newly-married
couple--probably the son or daughter of one of the sheriffs who had lent
the state carriage to add _éclat_ to the interesting occasion!

With the exception of the sensation produced at every place where they
changed horses, the only incident during their journey worth noticing,
occurred at the third stage from London. As they came dashing up to the
door of the inn, their advent setting all the bells of the establishment
ringing, and waiters and hostlers scampering up to them like mad, they
beheld a plain and laden dusty travelling-carriage, waiting for
horses--and Gammon quickly perceived it to be the carriage of the
unfortunate Aubreys! The travellers had alighted. The graceful figure of
Miss Aubrey, her face pale, and wearing an expression of manifest
anxiety and fatigue, was standing near the door, talking kindly to a
beggar-woman, with a cluster of half-naked children around her; while
little Aubrey was romping about with Miss Aubrey's beautiful little
spaniel Cato; Agnes looking on and laughing merrily, and trying to
escape from the hand of her attendant. Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey were talking
together, close beside the carriage-door. Gammon observed all this, and
particularly that Mr. Aubrey was scrutinizing their appearance, with a
sort of half-smile on his countenance, melancholy as it was.

"Horses on!" said Gammon, leaning back in the carriage.

"That's a monstrous fine woman standing at the inn door, Titmouse--eh?"
exclaimed Mr. Yahoo, who had alighted for a moment, and stood beside the
door of Titmouse's carriage, his execrable eye settled upon Miss Aubrey.
"I wonder who and what she is? By Jove, 'tis the face--the figure of an
angel! egad, they're _somebody_; I'll look at their panels!"

"I know who it is," said Titmouse, rather faintly; "I'll tell you
by-and-by."

"Now, _now_! my dear fellow. Our divinity is vanishing," whispered Mr.
Yahoo, eagerly, as Miss Aubrey, having slipped something into the
beggar's hand, stepped into the carriage. As soon as her brother had
entered, the door was closed, and they drove off.

"Who's that, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Miss Quirk, with a little
eagerness, observing--women are very quick in detecting such
matters--that both Gammon and Titmouse looked rather embarrassed.

"It's the--the Aubreys," replied Titmouse.

"Eh! By Jove!--is it?" quickly inquired old Quirk, putting his head out
of the window; "how very odd, to meet the old birds? Egad! their nest
must be yet warm--ha! ha!"

"What! dear papa, are those the people you've turned out? Gracious! I
thought I heard some one say that Miss Aubrey was pretty! La! I'm sure
_I_ thought--now what do _you_ think, Mr. Titmouse?" she added, turning
abruptly and looking keenly at him.

"Oh! 'pon my life, I--I--see nothing at all in her--devilish plain, I
should say--infernally pale, and all that!"

They were soon on their way again. Titmouse quickly recovered his
equanimity, but Gammon continued silent and thoughtful for many--many
miles; and the reader would not be surprised at it, if he knew as well
as I do the thoughts which the unexpected sight of that
travelling-carriage of Mr. Aubrey had suggested to Mr. Gammon.

As they approached the scene of triumph and rejoicing, and ascertained
that they were within about a mile of the peaceful little village of
Yatton, the travellers began to look out for indications of the kind
which Mr. Gammon had mentioned to Titmouse, viz. a band and procession,
and an attendant crowd. But however careful and extensive might have
been the arrangements of those to whom that matter had been intrusted,
they were likely to be sadly interfered with by a circumstance which,
happening just then, might, to a weaker and more superstitious mind than
that of Mr. Titmouse, have looked a little ominous--namely, the
occurrence of a tremendous thunder-storm. It was then about five o'clock
in the afternoon. The whole day had been overcast, and the sky
threatening; and just as the two carriages came to that turning in the
road which gave them the first glimpse of the Hall--only, however, the
tops of the great antique brick chimneys, which were visible above the
surrounding trees--a fearful, long-continued flash of lightning burst
from the angry heavens, followed, after an interval of but a second or
two, by a peal of thunder which sounded as if a park of artillery was
being repeatedly discharged immediately overhead.

"Mind your horses' heads, boys," called out Mr. Gammon; "keep a tight
rein."

Miss Quirk was dreadfully alarmed, and clung to her father; Titmouse
also seemed disconcerted, and looked to Gammon, who was perfectly calm,
though his face was not free from anxiety. The ghastly glare of the
lightning was again around them--all involuntarily hid their faces in
their hands--and again rattled the thunder in a peal lasting more than
half a minute, and seeming to be in frightful contiguity, as it were
only a few yards above their heads. Down, then, came the long-suspended
rain, pouring like a deluge, and so it continued, with frequent returns
of the thunder and lightning, for nearly a quarter of an hour. The last
turning brought them within sight of the village, and also of some fifty
or sixty persons crowding under the hedges, on each side--these were the
triumphant procession; musicians, flagmen, footmen, horsemen, all
dripping with wet, and constituting surely a spectacle piteous to
behold. Out, however, they all turned, true to their orders, as soon as
they saw the carriages, which immediately slackened their speed--the
rain also somewhat abating. The flagman tried desperately to unroll a
wet banner, of considerable size, with the words:--

     "WELCOME TO YATTON!"

in gilded letters; while the band (consisting of a man with a big drum,
another with a serpent, a third with a trumpet, a fourth with a bassoon,
two with clarionets, and a boy with a fife) struck up--"_See the
conquering hero comes!_" They puffed and blew lustily; bang! bang! bang!
went the drum; but the rain, the thunder, and the lightning woefully
interfered with their harmony. 'Twould have made your heart ache to see
the wet flag clinging obstinately to the pole, in spite of all the
efforts of its burly bearer! But now for the procession--first, on
horseback, was Barnabas Bloodsuck, (senior,) Esq.; beside him rode his
son, Barnabas Bloodsuck, (junior,) Esq.; then came the Reverend Gideon
Fleshpot, solemn simpleton, the vicar of Grilston, the only Radical
clergyman in that part of the country; beside him, the Reverend Smirk
Mudflint, a flippant, bitter, little Unitarian parson, a great crony of
Mr. Fleshpot, and his surname singularly enough exactly designating the
qualities of his brain and heart. Next to these, alone in his one-horse
chaise, (looking like a pill-box drawn by a leech,) came the little fat
Whig apothecary, Gargle Glister, Esq. Following him came, also in a gig,
Going Gone, Esq., the auctioneer--the main prop of the Liberal side,
being a most eloquent speaker--and Mr. Hic Hæc Hoc, a learned
schoolmaster, who undertook to teach the rudiments of Latin, viz. the
Latin grammar up as far as the irregular verbs. Then there were Mr.
Centipede, the editor, and Mr. Woodhouse, the publisher and proprietor
of the "YORKSHIRE STINGO," for which, also, Mr. Mudflint wrote a great
deal. These, and about a dozen others, the flower of the "party"
thereabouts, disdainful of the inclement weather, bent on displaying
their attachment to the new owner of Yatton, and solacing each his
patient inner man with anticipation of the jolly cheer awaiting him at
the Hall, formed the principal part of the procession; the rest
consisting of rather a miscellaneous assortment of scot-and-lot and
potwalloper-looking people, all very wet and hungry, and very frequently
casting looks of devout expectation towards the Hall. Scarcely a
villager of Yatton was to be seen stirring; nor did any of the tenants
of the estate join in the procession; even had they not felt far
otherwise disposed, they had luckily a complete excuse for their
non-appearance in the deplorable state of the weather. Sometimes the
band played; then a peal of thunder came; then a cry of "hurra!
Titmouse forever! hurra!" then the band, and then the thunder, and rain!
rain! rain! Thus they got to the park gates, where they paused, the
half-drowned men and boys shouting, "Titmouse forever! hurra--a--a!" Mr.
Titmouse bobbing about, now at one window, then at the other, with his
hat off, in the most gracious manner. Really it seemed almost as if the
elements were indicating the displeasure of heaven at Mr. Titmouse's
assumption of Yatton; for just as he was passing under the old gateway,
out flashed the lightning more vividly than it had yet appeared, and the
thunder bellowed and reverberated among the woods as though it would
never have ceased. The music and shouting now ended suddenly; carriages,
horsemen, pedestrians, quickened their pace in silence, as if anxious to
get out of the storm; the horses now and then plunging and rearing
violently. Titmouse was terribly frightened, in spite of his desperate
efforts to appear unconcerned. He was as pale as death, and looked
anxiously at Gammon, as if hoping to derive courage from the sight of
his rigid countenance. Miss Quirk trembled violently, and several times
uttered a faint scream: but her father, old Mr. Quirk, did not seem to
care a pinch of snuff about the whole matter; he rubbed his hands
together cheerily, chucked his daughter under the chin, rallied
Titmouse, and now and then nudged and jeered Gammon, who seemed disposed
to be serious and silent. Having drawn up opposite the Hall door, it was
opened by Mr. Griffiths, with a saddened, but still respectful look and
manner; and in the same way might be characterized some six or seven
servants standing behind him, in readiness to receive the new-comers.
The half-drowned musicians tried to strike up "Rule Britannia," as the
hero of the day, Mr. Titmouse, descended from his carriage, Mr.
Griffiths holding an umbrella for him, and bounded out of the rain with
a hop, step, and jump into the Hall, where the first words he was heard
to utter, were--

"What a devilish rum old place!"

"God bless you! God bless you! God bless you, Titmouse!" exclaimed old
Mr. Quirk, grasping him by the hand as soon as he had entered. Titmouse
shook hands with Miss Quirk, who immediately followed a female servant
to an apartment, being exceedingly nervous and agitated. Gammon seemed a
little out of spirits; and said simply, "You know, Mr. Titmouse, how
fervently _I_ congratulate you."

"Oh! my dear boy, Tit, do, for Heaven's sake, if you want the thunder
and lightning to cease, order those wretched devils off--send them
anywhere, but do stop their cursed noise, my dear boy!" exclaimed Mr.
Yahoo, as soon as he had entered, putting his fingers to his ears.

"Mr. what's-your-name," said Titmouse, addressing Mr. Griffiths, "I'll
trouble you to order off those fellows and their infernal noise. Demme!
there's a precious row making up above, and surely _one at a time_ will
do--demme!"

"Ah, ha, capital joke, by Jove! capital!" said Mr. Fitz-Snooks,
arranging his shirt-collar.

"A--Titmouse--by Jupiter!" said Mr. Yahoo, as, twirling his fingers
about in his long black hair, of which he seemed very proud, he glanced
about the Hall, "this a'n't so much amiss! Do you know, my dear boy, I
rather like it; it's substantial, antique, and so forth!"

"Who are those dem ugly old fellows up there?" presently exclaimed
Titmouse, as, with his glass stuck into his right eye, and his hands
into his coat-pockets, he stood staring at the old-fashioned pictures.

"Some of them, sir," replied Mr. Griffiths, with an irrepressible sigh,
"are ancestors of the Dreddlingtons, others of the Aubrey families. They
are very old, sir," continued Mr. Griffiths, "and are much admired, and
Mr. Aubrey desired me to say, that if you should be disposed to
part"----

"Oh confound him, he may have 'em all, if he'll pay for 'em, if that's
what he wants: I shall soon send them packing off!" Mr. Griffiths bowed,
and very nearly shed a tear. By this time the Hall was crowded with the
gentlemen who had formed part of the procession, and who came bowing and
scraping to the new lord of Yatton, congratulating him, and wishing him
health and happiness. As soon as he could disengage himself from their
flattering but somewhat troublesome civilities, Tweedle (his valet) came
and whispered, "Will you dress, sir? All is ready," and Titmouse
followed him to the dressing-room which had formerly been young Mrs.
Aubrey's. 'Twas the first time that Titmouse had ever experienced the
attentions of a valet; and he was quite nonplussed at the
multitudinousness and elegance of the arrangements around him. Such
quantities of clothes of all sorts--dressing-implements, curling-irons,
combs, brushes, razors, a splendid dressing-case, scents in profusion,
oils, bear's-grease, four or five different sorts of soaps, &c. &c. &c.;
all this gave Titmouse a far livelier idea of his altered circumstances,
of his having really become a GENTLEMAN, than anything which he had up
to that moment experienced. He thought his valet one of the cleverest
and most obliging men in the world, only somewhat oppressive with his
attentions; and at length Mr. Titmouse said he preferred _this_ time,
dressing alone, and so dismissed his obsequious attendant; whom,
however, he was soon obliged to summon to his assistance after all, not
knowing the proper uses of several implements about him. Having
completed his toilet, he descended into the drawing-room; which, as well
as the dining-room, was ready prepared for the banquet, covers being
laid for forty or fifty, and good substantial fare provided for at least
as many more, in the servants' hall, where operations had already
commenced. On entering the drawing-room, his appearance seemed to
produce a great sensation; and after a momentary and embarrassing pause,
the only county gentleman who was present, advanced and introduced
himself, his wife and daughter. This was Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire,
Baronet, a tall and somewhat corpulent man of about fifty, very choleric
and overbearing; his countenance showing the hard life he had led, his
nose being red, and his forehead and mouth beset with pimples. He had
been a bitter political opponent of Mr. Aubrey, and once a member for
the county; but had so crippled his resources by hunting and
horse-racing, as to compel the sacrifice of their town amusements; viz.
his seat in the House of Commons, and Lady Wildfire's box at the opera.
This had soured both of them not a little, and they had completely sunk
out of the county circle, in which they had once been sufficiently
conspicuous. Sir Harkaway had an eye to the borough of Yatton on the
happening of the next election, as soon as he had obtained an inkling
that the new proprietor of Yatton was a very weak young man; and hence
his patronizing presence at Yatton, in consequence of the invitation
respectfully conveyed to him in Mr. Titmouse's name, through Messrs.
Bloodsuck and Son. Besides Lady Wildfire and her daughter, both of whom
had inquired with a sort of haughty curiosity about the lady who had
accompanied Mr. Titmouse from town--a point which had been at length
cleared up to their satisfaction--there were about a dozen ladies, the
wives of the gentlemen who had borne so distinguished a part in the
triumphal procession. They certainly looked rather a queer set; and none
of them dared to speak either to Lady Wildfire or her daughter till
spoken to by them. Never had old Yatton beheld within its walls so
motley a group; and had the Aubreys continued there, hospitable as they
were, accessible and charitable as they were, I leave the reader to
guess whether such creatures ever _would_ have found their way thither.
By such guests, however, were the two principal tables crowded on this
joyous occasion, and about half-past six o'clock the feast commenced,
and a feast it certainly was, both elegant and substantial, nothing
having been spared that money could procure. Mr. Aubrey had a fine
cellar of wines at Yatton, which, owing to some strange
misunderstanding, had been sold by private contract, not among his own
friends in the neighborhood, as Mr. Aubrey had intended, and imagined
that he had directed, but to Mr. Titmouse. Choice, indeed, were these
wines, and supplied on the present occasion in wanton profusion.
Champagne, Burgundy, and claret, flowed like water, and the rich old
port, sherry, and madeira in like manner;--these last, however, not
being confined to the two principal rooms, but finding their way into
the servants' hall, where they there drank without stint. Merriment
echoed uproariously from all parts of the old Hall, and Mr. Titmouse was
universally declared to be a very fine fellow, and likely to become by
far the most popular man in the county. The Reverend Mr. Fleshpot said
grace, and the Reverend Mr. Mudflint returned thanks; and shortly
afterwards Sir Harkaway arose, and, his eye fixed firmly on the
adjoining borough, and also on the jolly table which promised to be ever
open to him at Yatton, he proposed the health of the distinguished
proprietor of Yatton, in a very flattering and energetic speech. The
toast was received with the utmost enthusiasm; the gentlemen shouted and
jingled their glasses on the table, while the ladies waved their
handkerchiefs; indeed the scene was one of such overpowering excitement,
that Miss Quirk burst into tears, overcome by her emotions; her papa
winking very hard to those about him, and using every exertion in his
power to point the attention of those present to the probability that a
very near and tender relationship was about to exist between that young
lady and Mr. Titmouse. Mr. Gammon, who sat next to Titmouse, assured him
that it was absolutely necessary for him to make a speech to the
company, in acknowledgment of the compliment which had just been paid
him.

"I shall put my foot into it--by jingo I shall! You must help me!" he
whispered to Mr. Gammon, in an agony of trepidation and a mist of
confusion, as he rose from his chair, being welcomed in the most
enthusiastic manner, by applause of every kind, lasting for several
minutes. At length, when the noise had subsided into a fearful silence,
he stammered out, prompted incessantly by Mr. Gammon, something
exceedingly like the following, if, indeed, he did not use these very
words.

"Mr.--I beg pardon--_Sir_ Hark--away, and gentlemen--gentlemen and
ladies, am most uncommon, monstrous--particular happy to--to--(eh?
_what_ d'ye say, Mr. Gammon?) see you all here--at this place--here--at
Yatton.--(_Applause._) Ladies and gentlemen--I say--hem!--unaccustomed
as--(_much applause_, during which Titmouse stooped and whispered to
Gammon--"Curse me if I can catch a word you say!") Happy and proud to
see you all here--at Yatton--homes of my ancestry--known to you
all--centuries. Enjoyed yourselves, I hope--(_great applause_)--and hope
you'll often come and do the same--(_still greater applause._)
Particular glad to see the ladies--(_applause_)--often heard of the
beauties of Yatton--never believed it--no--beg pardon, mean I now see
them--(_applause._) Am fond of horses--(_applause_)--racing, hunting,
and all that. (Here Sir Harkaway, extending his hand, publicly shook
that of the eloquent speaker.) Sorry to turn out the--the--old
bird--but--nest not _his_--mine all the while--(_sensation_)--bear him
no ill-will--(_applause._) Political principles--(_profound silence._)
Liberal principles--(_loud applause_)--rights of the people--religious
liberty and all that--(_vociferous applause_)--found at my post in the
hour of danger--enemy stole a march on me--(_great laughter and
applause._) Won't detain you--ladies and gentlemen--drink your good
healths, and many happy returns of the day." Down sat Mr. Titmouse,
exhausted by his maiden speech; and quite overpowered, moreover, by the
extraordinary applause with which he was greeted at its conclusion. In
due course, many other toasts were drunk; among them were--"_Lady
Wildfire and the married ladies._" "_Miss Wildfire and the single
ladies._" "_Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire._" "_Religious Liberty_," (to
which Mr. Mudflint responded in a very eloquent speech.) "_The Liberty
of the Press;_" "_Messrs Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, the enterprising,
skilful, and learned professional advisers of Mr. Titmouse._" Dancing
was now loudly called for; and the hall was speedily prepared for it. By
this time, however, it was past eleven o'clock; the free potations of
all the gentlemen, and indeed (to be candid) of more than one of the
ladies, were beginning to _tell_, and the noise and confusion were very
great. Fierce confused sounds issued from the servants' hall, where it
proved that a great fight was going on between Pumpkin the gardener, and
a man who insisted on shouting "Titmouse forever--down with Aubrey!"
Pumpkin, I am not sorry to say, had much the best of it, and beat his
opponent, after a severe encounter, into silence and submission. Then
there were songs sung in all the rooms at once--speeches made,
half-a-dozen at the same time; in short, never before had such doings
been witnessed, or such uproar heard, within the decorous, dignified,
and venerable precincts of Yatton. Scenes ensued which really baffle
description. Mr. Titmouse, of course, drank prodigiously, although Mr.
Gammon never left his side, and checked him fifty times when he was
about to fill his glass. The excitement thus produced by wine will, I
trust, in some measure mitigate the reader's indignation at hearing of a
little incident which occurred, in which Titmouse was concerned, and
which, about half past three or four o'clock in the morning, served to
bring that brilliant entertainment to a somewhat abrupt and rather
unpleasant termination. Scarcely knowing where he was, or what he was
about, I am sorry to say, that while standing, as well as he could,
beside Miss Wildfire, to dance for the fifth time with her--a plump,
fair-faced, good-natured girl of about nineteen or twenty--he suddenly
threw his arms around her, and imprinted half-a-dozen kisses on her
forehead, lips, cheek, and neck, before she could recover from the
confusion into which this monstrous outrage had thrown her. Her faint
shriek reached her father's ears, while he was, in a distant part of the
room, persecuting Miss Quirk with drunken and profligate impertinence.
Hastily approaching the quarter whence his daughter's voice had issued,
he beheld her just extricated from the insolent embrace of the
half-unconscious Titmouse, and greatly agitated. With flaming eye and
outstretched arm, he approached his unfortunate little host, and seizing
hold of his right ear, almost wrung it out of his head, Titmouse
actually yelling with the pain which he experienced. Still retaining his
hold, uttering the while most fearful imprecations--Sir Harkaway gave
him three violent kicks upon the seat of honor, the last of them sending
him spinning into the arms of old Mr. Quirk, who was hurrying up to his
relief, and who fell flat on the floor with the violent concussion. Then
Miss Quirk rushed forward and screamed; a scene of dreadful confusion
ensued; and at length the infuriated and half-drunken baronet, forced
away by his wife and his daughter, aided by several of the company,
quitted the Hall, and got into his carriage, uttering fearful threats
and curses all the way home; without once adverting to the circumstance,
of which also Lady Wildfire and her daughter were not aware, that he had
been himself engaged in perpetrating nearly the same sort of misconduct
which he had so severely and justly punished in poor Titmouse. As for
Mr. Yahoo and Mr. Fitz-Snooks, they had been in quest of similar sport
the whole night; and had each of them, in pursuing their adventures in
the servants' hall, very narrowly escaped much more serious indignities
and injuries than had fallen to the lot of the hospitable owner of the
mansion.

About half-past four o'clock, the sun was shining in cloudless splendor,
the air cleared, and all nature seeming freshened after the storm of the
preceding day; but what a scene was presented at Yatton! Two or three
persons, one with his hat off, asleep; another grasping a half-empty
bottle; and a third in a state of desperate indisposition, were to be
seen, at considerable distances from each other, by the side of the
carriage-road leading down to the park gates. Four or five horses, ready
saddled and bridled, but neglected, and apparently forgotten by both
servants and masters, were wandering about the fine green old court
opposite the Hall door, eating the grass, and crushing with their hoofs
the beautiful beds of flowers and shrubs which surrounded it. Mr.
Glister's gig had got its wheels entangled with the old sundial--having
been drawn thither by the horse, which had been put into it at least two
hours before; opposite the Hall door stood the post-chaise which had
brought Mr. and Mrs. Mudflint and their daughter. The latter two were
sitting in it, one asleep--the other, Mrs. Mudflint, anxiously on the
look-out for her husband, from time to time calling to him, but in vain;
for about half an hour before, he had quitted the room where he, Mr.
Fleshpot, Mr. Going Gone, and Mr. Centipede had been playing a rubber at
whist, till all of them had nearly fallen asleep with their cards in
their hands, and made his way to the stables; where, not finding his
chaise in the yard, or his horses in the stalls, he supposed his wife
and daughter had gone home, whither he followed them by the footpath
leading through the fields which stretched along the high-road to
Grilston; and along which said fields he was, at that moment,
staggering, hiccuping, not clearly understanding where he was, nor where
he had last seen his wife and daughter. Candles and lamps were still
burning and glimmering in some of the rooms; and in the servants' hall
there were some dozen or so of the lower kind of guests, who, having
awakened from a deep sleep, were calling for more ale, or wine, or
whatever else they could get. Some of the old family servants had fled
hours before from scenes of such unwanted riot, to their bedrooms, and,
having locked and barricaded the doors, had gone to sleep. Mr. Griffiths
sat in an old armchair in the library, the picture of misery; he had
been repeatedly abused and insulted during the night, and had gone
thither, unable to bear the sight of the disgusting revelry that was
going forward. In short, at every point that caught the eye, were
visible the evidences of the villanous debauchery which had prevailed
for the last seven hours; and which, under the Titmouse dynasty, was
likely to prevail at all times thereafter. As for Mr. Titmouse, half
stunned with the treatment which he had experienced at the hands of Sir
Harkaway, he had been carried to bed--where his excessive,
miscellaneous, and long-continued potations aggravating the effect of
the serious injuries which he had sustained, he lay sprawling, half
undressed, in a truly deplorable condition. Mr. Glister, who had been
summoned to his bedside upwards of an hour before, sat now nodding in
his chair beside his patient; and pretty nearly in a state of similar
exhaustion were his valet and the housekeeper, who had, from time to
time, wiped her eyes and sobbed aloud when thinking of past times, and
the horrid change which had come over old Yatton. Mr. Yahoo, Mr.
Fitz-Snooks, Mr. Snap, Mr. Quirk, and Miss Quirk, (the last having
retired to her bedroom in the utmost terror, at the time of Titmouse's
mischance,) were in their respective chambers, all of them probably
asleep. Poor Hector, chained to his kennel, having barked himself hoarse
for several hours, lay fast asleep, no one having attended to him, or
given him anything to eat since Mr. Titmouse's arrival. Gammon had
retired from the scene, in disgust and alarm, to his bedroom, some three
hours before; but unable to sleep--not, however, with excess of wine,
for he had drunk very little--had arisen about four o'clock, and was at
that moment wandering slowly, with folded arms and downcast countenance,
up and down the fine avenue of elm-trees, where, it may be recollected,
Mr. Aubrey had spent a portion of the last evening of his stay at
Yatton.

Such is _my_ account of that memorable entertainment--and as fair an
account as I know how to give of the matter; but it is curious to
observe how very differently the same thing will strike different
people. As soon as the grateful Mr. Centipede had recovered from the
excitement occasioned by the part which he had borne in the splendid
festival, he set to work, with the pen of a ready writer, and in the
next number of the "YORKSHIRE STINGO," there appeared the following
interesting account of the

     "FESTIVITIES _at_ YATTON HALL, _on the occasion of_ POSSESSION
            _being taken by_ TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQUIRE.

     "Yesterday this interesting event came off with signal _éclat_.
     Notwithstanding the very unfavorable state of the weather,  about
     five o'clock in the evening an imposing cavalcade, comprising many
     of the leading gentry and yeomanry of this part of the county, on
     foot and on horseback, preceded by an admirable band, and a large
     and splendid banner, bearing the inscription--'_Welcome to
     Yatton_,' went out to meet the above distinguished gentleman, whose
     _cortège_, in two carriages, made its appearance in the village
     about half-past five. The band immediately struck up 'See the
     Conquering Hero comes!' which inspiriting air, however, was nearly
     drowned in the shout which welcomed the new proprietor of the noble
     estate of Yatton. His carriage was of the most tasteful, splendid,
     and unique description, and attracted universal admiration. Mr.
     Titmouse repeatedly bowed through the carriage-windows, in graceful
     acknowledgment of the cordial welcome and congratulations with
     which he was received. He was dressed in a light blue surtout, with
     velvet collar, full black stock, and a rich velvet waistcoat of
     plaid pattern. His countenance is handsome and expressive, his eye
     penetrating, and his brow strongly indicative of thought. He
     appears to be little more than twenty-five years old; so that he
     has before him the prospect of a long and brilliant career of
     happiness and public usefulness. Tables were spread in all the
     chief apartments, groaning beneath the most costly viands. All the
     luxuries of the season were there; and the wines (which we believe
     were those of Mr. Aubrey) were of the first description. Grace was
     said by the exemplary vicar of Grilston, the Rev. Mr. Fleshpot; and
     the Rev. Mr. Mudflint returned thanks. Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire
     (whose amiable lady and accomplished daughter were present)
     proposed the health of Mr. Titmouse in a brief, but manly and
     cordial address; and the manner in which Mr. Titmouse acknowledged
     the toast, which was drunk with the greatest possible
     enthusiasm--the simplicity, point, and fervor which characterized
     every word he uttered--were such as to excite lively emotion in all
     who heard it, and warrant the highest expectations of his success
     in Parliament. Nothing could be more touching than his brief
     allusions to the sufferings and privations which he had
     undergone--nothing more delicate and forbearing than the feeling
     which pervaded his momentary allusion to the late occupant of
     Yatton. When, however, he distinctly avowed his political
     principles as those of a dauntless champion of civil and religious
     liberty among all classes of his Majesty's subjects--the applause
     was long and enthusiastic. After dinner, the great hall was cleared
     for dancing, which was opened by Mr. Titmouse and Miss Wildfire;
     Lady Wildfire being led out by the Honorable [!] Mr. Yahoo, an
     intimate friend of Mr. Titmouse. We should not omit to mention that
     Miss Quirk (the only daughter of Caleb Quirk, Esq., the head of the
     distinguished firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, of London, to whose
     untiring and most able exertions is owing the happy change which
     has taken place in the ownership of the Yatton property)
     accompanied her father, at the earnest request of Mr. Titmouse, who
     danced several sets with her; and it is whispered--but we will not
     anticipate family arrangements. Sir [!] Algernon Fitz-Snooks, a
     distinguished fashionable, also accompanied Mr. Titmouse, and
     entered with great spirit into all the gayeties of the evening. The
     'light fantastic toe' was kept 'tripping' till a late, or rather
     very early hour in the morning--when the old Hall was once more
     (for a time) surrendered to the repose and solitude from which it
     has been so suddenly and joyously aroused."

[In another part of the paper was contained an insulting paragraph,
charging Mr. Aubrey with being a party to the "flagrant and iniquitous
job," by which Sir Percival Pickering had been returned for the borough;
and intimating pretty distinctly, that Mr. Aubrey had not gone without
"_a consideration_" for his share in the nefarious transaction.]

A somewhat different account of the affair appeared in the "YORK TRUE
BLUE" of the same day.

     "YATTON HALL.--We have received one or two accounts of the orgies
     of which this venerable mansion was yesterday the scene, on
     occasion of Mr. Titmouse taking possession. We shall not give
     publicity to the details which have been furnished us--hoping that
     the youth and inexperience of the new owner of Yatton (all
     allowance, also, being made for the very natural excitement of such
     an occasion) will be deemed a palliative in some measure of the
     conduct then exhibited. One fact, however, we may mention, that a
     very serious _fracas_ arose between Mr. Titmouse and a certain
     well-known sporting baronet, which is expected to give employment
     to the gentlemen of the long robe at the ensuing assizes. Nor can
     we resist adverting to a circumstance, which our readers will, we
     trust, credit, on being assured that we witnessed it with our own
     eyes--that Mr. Titmouse positively travelled in the cast-off state
     carriage of the Lord Mayor of London!!!! Nothing, by the way, could
     be more absurd and contemptible than the attempt at a 'Procession'
     which was got up--of which our accounts are ludicrous in the
     extreme. Will our readers believe it, that the chief personages
     figuring on the occasion, were the editor and publisher of a
     certain low Radical print--which will no doubt, this day, favor its
     readers with a flaming description of this 'memorable affair!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Titmouse, assisted by his attentive valet, made a desperate attempt to
get up, and present himself the next day at dinner. Aided by a glass of
pretty strong brandy and water, he at length got through the fatiguing
duties of the toilet, and entered the drawing-room, where his travelling
companions were awaiting his arrival--dinner being momentarily expected
to be announced. He was deadly pale; his knees trembled; his temples
throbbed; his eyes could not bear the light; and everything seemed in
undulating motion around him, as he sank in silent exhaustion on the
sofa. After a few minutes' continuance, he was compelled to leave the
room, leaning on Gammon's arm, who conducted him to his chamber, and
left him in charge of his valet, who got him again into bed, and there
he lay, enduring much agony, (Dr. Goddart being sent for,) while his
friends were enjoying themselves at dinner.

Snap had set off the ensuing day for town, by the first coach, pursuant
to the arrangements already spoken of; but I think that old Mr. Quirk
would have made up his mind to continue at Yatton until something
definite had been done by Titmouse, in two matters which absorbed all
the thoughts of the old gentleman--his daughter and the _Ten Thousand
Pounds_ bond. Miss Quirk, however, intense as was her anxiety to become
the affianced bride of Titmouse, and as such the mistress of the
delightful domain where at present she dwelt only as a guest, and in a
very embarrassing position--was not so blind to all perception of
womanly delicacy as to prolong her stay; and at length prevailed upon
her father to take their departure on the day but one after that on
which they had arrived. Mr. Quirk was perfectly miserable. He vehemently
distrusted Titmouse--and feared and detested Gammon. As for the former
gentleman, he had not made any definite advances whatever towards Miss
Quirk, nor afforded to any one the slightest evidence of a promise of
marriage, either express or implied. He chattered to Miss Quirk an
infinite deal of vulgar absurdity--but that was all, in spite of the
innumerable opportunities afforded him by the lady and her anxious
parent. Was Titmouse acting under the secret advice of that deceitful
devil Gammon?--thought Mr. Quirk, in an ecstasy of perplexity and
apprehension. Then as to the other matter--but there Gammon had almost
as deep a stake, in proportion, as Quirk himself. On the morning of his
departure, he and Gammon had a very long interview, in which they
several times came to high words; but in the end Gammon vanquished his
opponent as usual; allayed all his apprehensions; and accounted for all
Titmouse's conduct in the most natural way in the world. "Look at his
position just now," quoth Gammon--"the excitement, the novelty, the
bewilderment, the indisposition he is experiencing: surely, surely
_this_ is not a moment to bring him to book!" In short, Gammon at length
brought Quirk, who had received the first intimation of the matter with
a sudden _grunt_ of surprise and anger, to acknowledge the propriety of
Gammon's remaining behind, to protect Titmouse from the designing Yahoo
that had got hold of him; and solemnly pledged himself, as in the sight
of Heaven, to use his utmost efforts to bring about, as speedily as
possible, the two grand objects of Mr. Quirk's wishes. With this the old
gentleman was fain to be satisfied; but entered the chaise which was to
convey Miss Quirk and himself to Grilston, with as rueful a countenance
as he had ever exhibited in his life. Mr. Titmouse was sufficiently
recovered to be present at the departure of Miss Quirk, who regarded his
interesting and languid looks with an eye of melting sympathy and
affection. With half a smile and half a tear, she slipped into his hand,
as he led her to the chaise, a little sprig of heart's ease, which he at
once stuck into the button-hole of his coat.

"'Pon my soul--must you go? Devilish sorry you can't stay to have seen
some fun!--The old gent" (meaning her father) "don't quite seem to like
it--he, he!" said he, in a low tone; then he handed her into the chaise,
she dropping her veil to conceal the starting tear of mingled
disappointment, and desire, and disgust, and they drove off, Titmouse
kissing his hand to her as he stood upon the steps; and, as soon as they
were out of sight, he exchanged a very significant smile with Mr.
Gammon.

The next day, Titmouse rose about ten o'clock, almost entirely recovered
from his indisposition. Accompanied by Mr. Yahoo and Mr. Fitz-Snooks,
with whom he was conversing as to the course he should take with
reference to Sir Harkaway--whom, however, they advised him to treat with
silent contempt, as he, Titmouse, was clearly in the wrong--he took a
stroll about noon, down the path leading to the park gates. They all
three had cigars in their mouths, Titmouse walking between them, as
odious-looking a little puppy, sure, as man ever saw--puffing out his
smoke slowly, and with half-closed eye, his right hand stuck into his
coat-pocket, and resting on his hip. These three figures--Heaven save
the mark!--were the new lord of Yatton and his select friends!

"By jingo, surely here comes a parson," quoth Titmouse; "what the devil
can he want here?"--'Twas Dr. Tatham, who slowly approached them,
dressed in his Sunday suit, and leaning on his old-fashioned
walking-stick, given him many, many years ago by the deceased Mrs.
Aubrey.

"Let's have some sport," said Fitz-Snooks.

"We must look devilish serious--no grinning till the proper time," said
Yahoo.

"Hallo--you sir!" commenced Titmouse, "who are you?" Dr. Tatham took off
his hat, bowed, and was passing on.

"_Devilish_ cool, upon--my--soul--sir?" said Titmouse, stopping, and
staring impudently at the worthy little doctor, who seemed taken quite
by surprise.

"My worthy old gentleman," said Yahoo, with mock respect, "are you aware
who it was that asked you a question?"

"I am not, sir," replied Dr. Tatham, quietly but resolutely.

"My name is Tittlebat Titmouse, at your service--and you are now in my
grounds," said Titmouse, approaching him with an impudent air.

"Am I really addressed by Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Dr. Tatham, somewhat
incredulously.

"Why, 'pon my life, I _think_ so, unless I'm changed lately; and by
Jove, sir--_now_, who are you?"

"I am Dr. Tatham, sir, the vicar of Yatton: I _had_ intended calling at
the Hall, as a matter of courtesy; but I fear I am intruding"----

"Devil a bit--no, 'pon honor, no! you're a very good old fellow, I don't
doubt!--Pray--a--is that little church outside, yours?"

"It is, sir," replied Dr. Tatham, seriously and sternly; his manner
completely abashing the presumptuous little coxcomb who addressed him.

"Oh--well--I--I--'pon my soul, happy to see you, sir--you'll find
something to eat in the Hall, I dare say"----

"Do you preach in that same little church of yours next Sunday?"
inquired Mr. Yahoo, whose gross countenance had filled Dr. Tatham with
unspeakable aversion.

"I preach there _every_ Sunday, sir, twice," he replied gravely and
distantly.

"You see, sir," lisped Fitz-Snooks, "the prayers are so--so--_devilish_
long and tiresome--if you could--eh?--shorten 'em a little?"--

Dr. Tatham slowly turned away from them, and, disregarding their calls
to him, though their tone of voice was greatly altered, walked back
again towards the gate, and quitted the park for the first time in his
life, with feelings of mortal repugnance. On reaching his little study,
he sat down in his old armchair, and fell into a sad revery, which
lasted more than an hour; and then he rose, and went to see the old
blind stag-hound fed--and looked at it, licking his hands, with feelings
of unusual tenderness; and the doctor shed a tear or two as he patted
its smooth gray old head.

On Saturday morning, Mr. Titmouse, at Mr. Gammon's instance, had fixed
to go over the estate, accompanied by that gentleman, and by Mr. Waters
and Dickons, to give all the information required of them, and point out
the position and extent of the property. To an eye capable of
appreciating it, in what admirable order was everything! but Titmouse
quickly tired of it, and when about a mile from the Hall, discovered
that he had left his cigar-box behind him; at which he expressed
infinite concern, and, greatly to the annoyance of Gammon, and the
contempt of his two bailiffs, insisted on returning home; so they
re-entered the park. How beautiful it was! Its gently undulating
surface, smooth as if overspread with green velvet; trees great and
small, single and in clumps, standing in positions so picturesque and
commanding; the broad, babbling, clear trout-stream winding through
every part of the park, with here and there a mimic fall, seen faintly
flashing and glistening in the distance; herds of deer suddenly startled
amid their green pastures and silent shades, and moving off with
graceful ease and rapidity; here and there a rustic bridge over the
stream; here an old stone bench placed on an elevation commanding an
extensive prospect; there a kind of grotto, or an ivy-covered
summer-house; then the dense, extensive, and gloomy woods, forming a
semicircular sweep round the back of the Hall; all around, nearly as far
as the eye could reach, land of every kind in the highest state of
cultivation, plentifully stocked with fine cattle, and interspersed with
snug and substantial farms.

All this, thought Titmouse, might do very well for those who fancied
that sort of thing; but as for _him_, how the devil could he have
thought of leaving his cigars behind him? Where, he wondered, were Yahoo
and Fitz-Snooks? and quickened his pace homeward.

On Gammon the scene which they had been witnessing had made a profound
impression; and as his attention was now and then called off from
contemplating it, by some ignorant and puerile remark of the proprietor
of the fine domain, he felt a momentary exasperation at himself for the
part he had taken in the expulsion of the Aubreys, and the introduction
of such a creature as Titmouse. That revived certain other thoughts,
which led him into speculations of a description which would have
afforded uneasiness even to the little idiot beside him, could he have
been made aware of them. But the cloud that had darkened his brow was
dispelled by a word or two of Titmouse. "Mr. Gammon, 'pon my soul you're
devilish dull to-day," said he. Gammon started; and with his winning
smile and cheerful voice, instantly replied, "Oh, Mr. Titmouse, I was
only thinking how happy you are; and that you deserve it!"

"Yes; 'pon my soul it ought all to have been mine at my birth!--Don't it
tire you, Mr. Gammon, to walk in this up-and-down, zig-zag,
here-and-there sort of way? It does _me_, 'pon my life! What would I
give for a cigar at this moment!"

The next day was the Sabbath, tranquil and beautiful; and just as the
little tinkling bell of Yatton church had ceased, at half-past ten
o'clock, Dr. Tatham rose, in his reading-desk, and commenced the
service. The church was quite full, for every one was naturally anxious
to catch a glimpse of the new tenants of the squire's pew. It was empty,
however, till about five minutes after the service had commenced, when a
gentleman walked slowly up to the church door; and having whispered an
inquiry of the old pew-opener which was the squire's pew, she led him
into it--all eyes settled upon him; and all were struck with his
appearance, his calm keen features, and gentlemanly figure. 'Twas, of
course, Gammon; who, with the utmost decorum and solemnity, having stood
for half a minute with his hat covering his face, during which time he
reflected that Miss Aubrey had sat in that pew on the last occasion of
his attendance at the church, turned round, and behaved with the
greatest seriousness and reverence throughout the service, paying
marked attention to the sermon. Gammon was an unbeliever, but he thought
Dr. Tatham an amiable and learned enthusiast, but who was most probably
in earnest; and he felt disposed to admit, as his eye glanced round the
attentive and decent congregation, that the sort of thing was not
without its advantages. Almost all present took him for Titmouse, and
watched every turn of his countenance with intense interest; and, in
their simplicity, they rejoiced that Mr. Aubrey's successor was, at all
events, so grave and respectable-looking a man; and they fancied that he
frequently thought, with kindness and regret, of those whose seat he was
occupying. About the middle of the service, the main-door of the church
standing wide open, the congregation beheld three gentlemen, smoking
cigars, and laughing and talking together, approaching the porch. They
were dressed very finely indeed; and were supposed to be some of the
great friends of the new squire. They stopped when within a few yards of
the church; and after whispering together for a moment, one of them,
having expelled a mouthful of smoke, stepped forward to the door,
holding his cigar in one hand, and with the other taking off his hat.
There was a faint smirk on his face, (for he did not catch the stern
countenance of Gammon anxiously directed towards him,) till he beheld
Dr. Tatham's solemn eye fixed upon him, while he made a momentary pause.
Titmouse blushed scarlet; made a hesitating but most respectful bow;
and, stepping back a few paces, replaced his hat on his head, and lit
his cigar from that of Mr. Fitz-Snooks, within view, perhaps
unconsciously, of more than half the congregation. Then the three
gentlemen, after Mr. Titmouse had spoken a word or two to them, burst
out into a laugh, and quitted the churchyard.




CHAPTER VII.


Aubrey's sudden plunge into the cold and deep stream of trouble,
had--the first shock over--served, as it were, to brace his nerves. 'Tis
at such a time, and on such an occasion, that the temper and quality of
the soul are tried; whether it be weak in seeming strength, or strong in
seeming weakness. How many are there, walking with smiling complacent
confidence along the flowery bank, who, if suddenly bidden to strip and
enter, would turn pale and tremble as they reluctantly prepared to obey
the stern mandate; and, after a convulsive shudder, a faint shriek, a
brief struggle, disappear from the surface, paralyzed, never to be seen
again! In such a point of view, let me hope that the situation of
Aubrey, one of deepening difficulty and danger--the issue of which, hid
in the darkness of the future, no earthly intelligence could
predict--will excite in the thoughtful reader an anxiety not unmingled
with confidence.

The enervating effects of _inactivity_ upon the physical structure and
energies of mankind, few can have failed to observe. Rust is more fatal
to metal than wear. A thorough-bred racer, if confined in stable or
paddock, or a boxer, born of the finest muscular make, if prematurely
incarcerated in jail, will, after a few years, become quite unable to
compete with those vastly their inferiors in natural endowments and
capabilities; however they may, with careful training, be restored to
the full enjoyment and exercise of their powers. Thus is it with the
temper and intellect of man, which, secluded from the scenes of
_appropriate_ stimulus and exercise, become relaxed and weakened. What
would have become of the glorious spirit and powers of Achilles, if
his days had all melted away in the tender, delicate, emasculating
inactivity and indulgence of the court of Lycomedes? The language
of the ancient orator concerning his art may be applied to _life_,
that not only its greatness, but its enjoyment, consists in
action--_action_--ACTION. The feelings, for instance, may become so
morbidly sensitive, as to give an appearance of weakness to the whole
character; and this is likely to be specially the case of one born with
those of superior liveliness and delicacy, if he be destined to move
only in the realms of silent and profound abstraction and
contemplation--in those refined regions which may be termed a sort of
paradise; where every conceivable source of enjoyment is cultivated for
the fortunate and fastidious occupants, to the very uttermost, and all
those innumerable things which fret, worry, and harass the temper, the
head, and the heart of the dwellers in the rude regions of ordinary
life--most anxiously weeded out; instead of entering into the throng of
life, and taking part in its constant cares and conflicts--scenes which
require all his energies always in exercise, to keep his place, and
escape being trodden under foot. Rely upon it, that the man who feels a
tendency to shrink from collision with his fellows, to run away with
distaste or apprehension from the great practical business of life, does
not enjoy moral or intellectual health; will quickly contract a silly
conceit and fastidiousness, or sink into imbecility and misanthropy; and
should devoutly thank Providence for the occasion, however momentarily
startling and irritating, which stirs him out of his lethargy, his
_cowardly_ lethargy, and sends him among his fellows--puts him, in a
manner, upon a course of training; upon an experience of comparative
suffering, it may be of sorrow, requiring the exercise of powers of
which he had before scarcely been conscious, and giving him presently
the exhilarating consciousness that he is exhibiting himself--a MAN.

"It is probable," says the late Mr. Foster, in his Essay on "Decision of
Character"--"that the men most distinguished for decision, have not, in
general, possessed a large share of tenderness: and it is easy to
imagine that the laws according to which our nature is formed, will with
great difficulty allow the combination of the refined sensibilities,
with a hardy, never shrinking, never yielding constancy. Is it not
almost of the essence of this constancy, to be free from even the
_perception_ of such impressions as cause a mind, weak through
susceptibility, to relax, or to waver?--No doubt, this firmness consists
partly in overcoming feelings--but it may consist partly, too, in not
having them." The case I am contemplating is perhaps the difficult,
though by no means, I am persuaded, uncommon one--of a person possessing
these delicate sensibilities, these lively feelings; yet with a native
strength of character beneath, which, when the occasion for its display
has arisen--when it is placed in a scene of constant and compulsory
action, will fully evince and vindicate itself. It is then "that another
essential principle of decision of character," to quote from another
part of the same essay, "will be displayed; namely, a total incapability
of surrendering to indifference or delay the serious determinations of
the mind. A strenuous will accompanies the conclusions of thought, and
constantly urges the utmost efforts for their practical accomplishment.
The intellect is invested, as it were, with a glowing atmosphere of
passion, under the influence of which the cold dictates of reason take
fire, and spring into active powers."

There is, indeed, nothing like throwing a man of the description we are
considering, upon his own resources, and compelling him to exertion.
Listen, ye languid and often gifted victims of indolence and _ennui_, to
the noble language of one blessed with as great powers as perhaps were
ever vouchsafed to man--Edmund Barke!

    "DIFFICULTY is a severe instructor, set over us by the Supreme
    ordinance of a parental guardian and legislator, who knows us
    better than we know ourselves, as He loves us better, too. _Pater
    ipse colendi, haud facilem esse viam voluit._ He that wrestles with
    us, strengthens our nerves and sharpens our skill; our antagonist
    is our helper. This amicable contest with difficulty, obliges us to
    an intimate acquaintance with our object, and compels us to
    consider it in all its relations; it will not suffer us to be
    superficial."

The man, moreover, whose disposition is one of sterling excellence,
despite the few foibles which it may have contracted in comparative
solitude and inactivity, when he is compelled to mix indiscriminately
with the great family of man, oh, how patient and tolerant becomes he of
the weakness and errors of others, when thus constantly reminded of, and
made to feel his own! Oh, how pitiful! how very pitiful is he!--How his
heart yearns and overflows with love, and mercy, and charity towards his
species, _individually_--whose eye looks oft on their grievous
privations, their often incurable distress and misery!--and who in the
spirit of a heavenly philanthropy penetrates even to those deserted
quarters--

    "Where hopeless anguish pours her moan,
    And lonely want retires to die!"

It may be that some of the preceding observations are applicable to many
individuals of the purest and most amiable characters, and powerful and
cultivated intellects, in the higher classes of society, whose
affluence exempts them from the necessity of actively intermingling
with the concerns of life, and feeling the consciousness of individual
responsibility,--of having a personal necessity for anxious care and
exertion. They are assured that a position of real precariousness and
danger, is that which is requisite for developing the energies of a man
of high moral and intellectual character; as it will expose to
destruction one of a contrary description.

I have endeavored, in previous portions of this history, to delineate
faithfully the character of Mr. Aubrey--one (how idle and childish would
have been the attempt!) by no means _perfect_, yet with very high
qualities. He was a man of noble simplicity of character, generous,
confiding, sincere, affectionate: possessing a profound sense of
religion, _really influencing his conduct in life;_ an intellect of a
superior order, of a practical turn, of a masculine strength--as had
been evidenced by his successful academical career, his thorough mastery
of some of the most important and difficult branches of human knowledge,
and by his aptitude for public business. He was at the same time
possessed of a sensibility that was certainly excessive. He had a morbid
tendency to pensiveness, if not melancholy, which, with a feeble
_physical_ constitution, was partly derived from his mother, and partly
accounted for by the species of life which he had led. From his early
youth he had been addicted to close and severe study, which had given
permanence and strength to his naturally contemplative turn. He had not,
moreover, with too many possessed of his means and station, entered,
just at the dawn and bloom of manhood, upon that course of dissipation
which is a sure and speedy means of destroying "the freshness of thought
and of feeling," which "never again can be theirs," and inducing a
_lowered tone_ of feeling, and a callousness which some seem to consider
necessary to enable them to pass through life easily and agreeably. He,
on the contrary, had stepped out of the gloom and solitude of the
cloister into the pure and peaceful region of domestic life, with all
its hallowed and unutterable tendernesses, where the affections grew
luxuriantly; in the constant society of such women as his mother, his
sister, his wife, and latterly his lovely children. Then he was
possessed, all this while, of a fine fortune--one which placed him far
beyond the necessity for anxiety or exertion. With such tastes as these,
such a temperament as his, and leading such a life as his, is it
surprising that the tone of his feelings should have become somewhat
relaxed? The three or four years which he had spent in Parliament, when
he plunged into its fierce and absorbing excitement with characteristic
ardor and determination, though calculated to sharpen the faculties, and
draw forth the resources of his intellect, subjected him to those
alternations of elevation and depression, those extremes of action and
reaction, which were not calculated to _correct_ his morbid tendencies.

Therefore came there up to him a messenger from Heaven, with trouble and
affliction in his countenance, telling him to descend from the happy
solitude of his high mountain, into the dismal hubbub and conflict in
the plain beneath. He came down with humility and awe, and with reverent
resignation; and was--instantly surrounded!--

A weak man would have been confused and stunned, and so sunk helpless
into the leaden arms of despair. But it was not so with Aubrey. There
was that dormant energy within, which, when appealed to, quickly shook
off the weakness contracted by inaction, and told him to _be up and
doing_; and that, not with the fitfulness of mere impulse, but the
constant strength of a well regulated mind, conscious of its critical
position; and also of a calm inflexible determination to vanquish
difficulty, and if possible escape the imminent danger, however long
and doubtful might prove the conflict. Above all, he was consoled and
blessed by the conviction, that nothing could befall him that was not
the ordination of Providence,

      ----"supremely wise,
    Alike in what it gives and what denies;"

that His was the ordering of the sunshine and the gloom, the tempest and
the calm of life. This was to Aubrey--this is--as the humble writer of
these pages (who has had in his time his measure of anxiety and
affliction) has in his soul a profound and intimate persuasion and
conviction of--the only source of real fortitude and resignation, amid
the perplexities, and afflictions, and dangers of life. Depend upon it,
that a secret and scarce acknowledged disbelief, or at least doubt and
distrust of the very existence of God, and of His government of the
world--HIS REAL PRESENCE AND INTERFERENCE with the men and the things of
the world--lies at the bottom of almost all impatience and despair under
adverse circumstances. How can he be impatient, or despairing, who
believes not only the existence of God, and His moral government of the
world, but that He has mercifully vouchsafed to reveal and declare
expressly that the infliction of suffering and sorrow is directly from
Himself, and designed solely for the advantage of His creatures? _If ye
endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he
whom the father chasteneth not? We have had fathers of our flesh which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in
subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? For they verily for a
few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness. Now, no chastening for the
present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which_ _are
exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the
feeble knees._ While thus benignantly teacheth the voice of God, thought
Aubrey, shall I rather incline mine ear to the blighting whisper of the
Evil One--_a liar, and the father of a lie_, who would fain that I
should become _a fool, saying within my heart there is no God_--or, if I
cannot but believe that there is one, provoking me to _charge Him
foolishly, to curse Him and die_? Not so, however, had Aubrey read the
Scriptures--not so had he learned the Christian religion.

The last time that we caught a glimpse of the ruined family, they had
arrived nearly at the end of their long and melancholy journey from
Yatton to the metropolis. When before had such been the character of
their journey to town? Had they not ever looked forward with pleasure
towards the brilliant gayeties of the season; their re-entrance into an
extensive and splendid circle of friends--and he into the delightful
excitement of political life--the opening of the parliamentary campaign?
Alas, how changed now all this! how gloomy and threatening the aspect of
the metropolis, whose dusky outskirts they were entering! With what
feelings of oppression--of vague indefinite apprehension--did they now
approach it: their spirits heavy, their hearts bleeding with their
recent severance from Yatton! _Now_, distress, desertion, dismay, seemed
associated with the formidable name of "London." They had now no place
of their own awaiting, thoroughly prepared for them, their welcome
arrival--but must drive to some quiet and inexpensive family hotel for
temporary shelter. As their eyes caught familiar point after point in
their route through the suburbs--now passed at a moderate pace, with a
modest pair of horses; formerly dashed past by them in their carriage
and four--there were very few words spoken by those within the carriage.
Both the children were fast asleep. Poor Kate, as they entered
Piccadilly, burst into tears: her pent-up feelings, suddenly gave way,
and she cried heartily; Mrs. Aubrey also weeping. Mr. Aubrey was calm,
but evidently oppressed with profound anxiety. Still he affectionately
grasped their hands, and, in something which was designed for a cheerful
tone and manner, besought them to restrain their feelings, and thank
Heaven that so far they had got on safely.

"I shall be better presently, Charles," said Miss Aubrey, passionately,
burying her face in her handkerchief, "but I feel quite _afraid_ of
London!"

Over the pavement they rattled, meeting carriages rolling in all
directions--for it was about the dinner-hour, and in the height of the
season; and it was the casual but vivid evidence thus afforded of their
desolate position, this sudden glimpse of old familiar scenes, which had
momentarily overcome the fortitude of Miss Aubrey. They drove to a quiet
family hotel in a retired street running parallel with Piccadilly; they
were all wearied, both in mind and body, and after a very slight repast,
and much anxious and desponding conversation, they bade each other
affectionate adieus, and retired to rest. They rose in the morning
refreshed with repose, and in a much more tranquil mood of mind than
could have been expected.

"Now we enter," said Aubrey, with a cheerful smile, "upon the real
business of life; so we must discard sentiment--we must not think of the
past, but the future."

At their request, they, shortly after breakfast, accompanied him to the
house agent who had been commissioned by Mr. Runnington to look out two
or three residences from which, on their arrival in town, they might
easily select that deemed most suitable for their purposes. One was
particularly recommended to them; and after due inquiry, within three
days after their arrival in town, they engaged it. 'Twas a small, but
convenient, airy, and comfortable house, within five minutes' walk of
Hyde Park, and situated in Vivian Street--a recently completed one--and
as quiet and retired as they could have wished. The rent, too, was
moderate--fifty pounds a-year. Though none of the houses in the street
were large, they were all strictly private residences, and had an air of
thorough respectability. Mr. Aubrey's house had but one window to the
dining-room, and two to the drawing-room. The passage and staircase were
sufficiently commodious, as were the chief apartments. At the back of
the house was a small garden, about twenty yards in length, and about
ten yards in width, with several lilacs, laburnums, and shrubs; and a
considerable portion of the wall was covered with ivy. Was not this a
delightful place for the children to play about in? The back parlor, a
somewhat small one certainly, looked into this garden, and was at once
appropriated to be a library for Mr. Aubrey. Within a week's time, all
their luggage, furniture, &c., had arrived in town from Yatton; and they
had quite sufficient to furnish their little residence out of the wreck
of the equipments of the old Hall--adapted as it was, under the tasteful
superintendence of Mrs. and Miss Aubrey, with equal regard to elegance,
simplicity, and economy. How busy were they all for a fortnight! Many
and many an irrepressible sigh, and rebellious tear, would the sight of
these old familiar objects, in their new situation, occasion them! Some
half dozen family pictures hung upon the wall. Over the mantel-piece was
suspended a piece of beautiful embroidery--by poor old Mrs. Aubrey, many
years before--of the arms of the family. In the dining-room was the old
high-backed chair in which she had sat for twenty years and more. In the
drawing-room was Miss Aubrey's favorite ebony inlaid cabinet, and Mrs.
Aubrey's piano; and, in short, everywhere might be seen the delicate
traces of dear, dear, graceful, and elegant _woman_--touching nothing
that she adorns not! What with the silk curtains, and a carpet of
simple but tasteful pattern, and the various articles of furniture and
ornament, all possessing a kind of _old family air_--all from Yatton, I
declare there was a sort of richness about the general aspect of the
drawing-room; and when Mrs. Aubrey and Kate came to fetch Mr. Aubrey out
of his little library to witness the completion of their labors, he
gazed round him for a while, looked at each object, and then at the two
dear fond beings standing beside him, awaiting his opinion with womanly
eagerness; but he could not express his feelings. He kissed each of them
very tenderly and in silence, and then they were a little overcome. His
library, also, though _very_ small, was as snug and comfortable as a
bookworm could have desired. All the sides were covered with books, and
in the middle were the library-table and armchair which he had used in
Grosvenor Street, and which were, it must be owned, on too large a scale
for the little room to which they had been removed.

That this oppressed family were not incessantly and very painfully
reminded of the contrast afforded by their present to their former
circumstances, I do not pretend to assert; but it very, very seldom
formed a topic of _conversation_ between any of them. When, however, the
little bustle and occupation of arranging their house was over, and Mrs.
Aubrey and Kate were left a good deal to themselves--Mr. Aubrey being
either absent from home, or in his library, engaged in matters of the
last importance to them all--then they would talk together with
increasing eagerness and excitement about past times, and their recent
troubles and bereavements; not displaying then--sweet souls!--_quite_
that degree of resignation and fortitude which they strove to exhibit in
the presence of Mr. Aubrey.

    "Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon."

They passed a good deal of their time in-doors in needlework,
_practical_ family needlework, an art in which they were not
particularly accomplished, but which they quickly acquired from a
seamstress whom they kept engaged constantly in the house for several
weeks. Then sometimes they would sit down to the piano; at other times
they would read--on all occasions, however, frequently falling into
conversation on the all-engrossing topic of their expulsion from Yatton.
Now and then, they could scarcely refrain from a melancholy smile, when
they remarked upon their shrunken personal importance. "Really, Agnes,"
said one day Miss Aubrey, "I feel just as one can fancy a few poor newly
shorn sheep must feel! So light and cold! So much _less_ than they were
half an hour before! Surely they must hardly know what to make of
themselves!"

"Then, I suppose, mamma," said Charles, who was sitting on a stool
beside them--making believe to write on a small slate--"I am a _little_
sheep?" They both looked at the child with silent tenderness, and
presently thought of Him who "_tempers the wind_ to the shorn lamb."

Their proximity to the parks was delightful, and many a pleasant hour
did they pass there with the children; and then returning home, would
occupy themselves with writing letters--and long ones they usually
were--to early and loved friends, especially to Dr. Tatham, with whom
Miss Aubrey kept up a constant correspondence. I ought to have mentioned
before, that Mr. Aubrey, in bringing his favorite valet up to town with
him, had no other design than, with that kind thoughtfulness for which
he was remarkable, to have an opportunity of securing for him a good
situation; and that he succeeded in doing, after about a fortnight's
interval; but the poor fellow was quite confounded when he first heard
that he was to quit the service of Mr. Aubrey, and, almost falling on
his knees, begged to be permitted to continue and receive no wages, and
he should be a happy man. Mr. Aubrey was, however, firm; and on parting
with him, which he did with no little emotion, put two guineas into his
hand as a present, and wished him health and happiness. The poor
fellow's deep distress at parting with the family sensibly affected them
all, and reminded them vividly of one of the latest and bitterest scenes
at Yatton. On his departure, their little establishment consisted but of
three female servants, a cook, a housemaid, and a nursery-maid. It took
them some little time to familiarize themselves with the attendance of a
female servant at dinner! That was one little matter--and another was
Charles' now and then complaining of being tired, and inquiring why his
mamma did not drive in the carriage as she used to do, and how he should
like to go with her!--which brought home to them, in a lively manner,
their altered circumstances--their fallen fortunes. Many, many were the
anxious calculations they made together, of the probable amount of their
annual expenditure--which at length, inexperienced as they were, they
fixed at from £300 to £400, including everything; his wife and sister
eagerly assuring Mr. Aubrey, and persuading each other, that as for
clothes--_their_ wardrobe would, with care, last them for three or four
years to come--so that _that_ was an item which might be almost
altogether excluded from the account; except by the way, the
children--yes, _they_ should be always well-dressed; that all agreed
upon. Then there was their education--oh, Kate would see to _that_!
Could they, in this manner, with rigid and persevering economy, hold on
their way for a year or two? was a question they often asked one
another, with beating hearts. If they could, then, they said, they
should be happy; for they had _health_--they had peace of mind; their
consciences were not oppressed by a sense of misconduct--and they were
able to put their trust in Providence.

Mr. Aubrey resolved to live in strict privacy; and they consequently
communicated their residence to but one or two of their numerous
friends, and to them only in confidence. To have acted otherwise, would
have seriously interfered with the arrangements which, long ago
contemplated, he had now fixed upon. It would have been perpetually
calling their attention to the contrast between former days and scenes,
and the present; opening their wounds afresh; and moreover, subjecting
them to kind and generous importunities and offers, which, however
delicate, would have been exquisitely painful and trying to an honorable
pride. But it is time that I should proceed to give a more particular
account of the position, the personal feelings, and the purposes and
prospects of Mr. Aubrey.

From the moment when he received the first intimation of the
desperate assault about to be made upon his fortunes, he felt a
conviction--whether arising from weakness, or superstition, or any
other cause it concerns me not here to say--that the issue would be a
disastrous one for him; and, the first alarm and confusion over, he
addressed himself with serious calmness, with deep anxiety, to the
determination of his future course of life. A man of his refined taste
and feeling would inevitably appreciate exquisitely--with, indeed, a
most agonizing intensity--the loss of all those superior enjoyments--the
deliciæ of life--to which he had been from his birth accustomed. _Semper
enim delicatè ac molliter vixit._ I speak not here of the mere exterior
"appliances and means" of wealth and station, but of the fastidious and
sensitive condition of _feeling_ and temper, which such a state of
things is calculated to engender in a person of his description. He
could part with the one; but how could he divest himself of the other?
Even had he been alone in the world, and not surrounded with objects of
the tenderest regard, whose safety or ruin was involved in his own, one
of the results of his opponent's success--namely, his claim to the mesne
profits--was calculated to fetter all his movements, to hang like a
millstone round his neck; and that effect, indeed, it had. Still he
played the man--resolved to act promptly, and with the best
consideration he could give to his critical position. He had not yet
reached the prime of life; had a fair share of health; had been blessed
with the inestimable advantages of a thorough--a first-rate
education--and, above all, had followed out his early advantages by
laborious and systematic study. He had not only made accurate,
extensive, and valuable acquisitions of knowledge, but learned how to
use them--to turn them to practical account. What would, he thought,
have become of him, had he--or those before him--neglected his
education? Then he had acquired a considerable familiarity with business
habits, in the House of Commons; and had friends and connections who
might be of essential service to him, if he could but first succeed in
acquiring such a position as would enable him to avail himself of their
good offices. Surely all _these_ were cheering considerations! Had he
not even advantages superior to those possessed by many in entering upon
some one of the scenes of honorable struggles for a livelihood, and even
for distinction? He surveyed all the professions with much deliberation.
The army and navy were of course out of the question. There was the
_Church:_ but no--his soul recoiled from the degradation and guilt of
entering that holy calling from mercenary motives, merely as a means of
acquiring a livelihood; and he would rather have perished, than prefer
the prayer uttered by the doomed descendants of one whose lamentable
case is left on record--who _came and_ _crouched for a piece of silver,
and a morsel of bread, saying, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the
priest's offices, that I may eat a piece of bread._[15] A personage of
very high distinction in the Church--of eminent piety and learning--who
was aware of the misfortunes of Aubrey, and well acquainted with his
pure and exemplary character--his learning and acquirements--his fitness
for the ministerial office--wrote to him, offering him every facility
for taking orders, and assuring him that he need not wait long before he
should be placed in a situation of public usefulness. Though he assured
Mr. Aubrey that he believed himself consulting the best interests, both
of Mr. Aubrey and of the Church--the scruples of Mr. Aubrey were not to
be overcome; and he wrote to the kind and venerable prelate, a letter
declining his offers, and assigning reasons which filled him with
profound respect for Mr. Aubrey. Then literature, for which--for real
substantial literature--he possessed superior qualifications, was
proverbially precarious. As for _teaching_--he felt quite unfit for it;
he had not the least inclination for it; 'twas a cheerless scene of
exertion; in which, as it were, he felt his energies _perishing in the
using_. The BAR was the profession to which his tastes and inclinations,
and, he hoped, his qualifications, pointed him. One of the first things
he did, on reaching London, was to apply for information to one
consummately qualified to guide him in the matter. He wrote to the
Attorney-General, soliciting an interview at his chambers upon the
subject of entering the profession; and received an immediate answer,
appointing ten o'clock on Saturday, on which day the Attorney-General
expected to be partially free from public engagements. Precisely at that
hour, Mr. Aubrey entered the chambers of that distinguished person,
whose arrival he had anticipated. Poor Aubrey felt a little nervous and
depressed as the fussy clerk showed him into the room--_as he fancied_,
and only fancied--with an air of patronizing civility, as if aware of
his diminished personal consequence. He stood for a minute or two very
close to Mr. Aubrey, with a sort of confidence in his manner as he
rubbed his hands, and glibly observed on the innumerable engagements of
the Attorney-General, which slightly--_very slightly_--displeased Mr.
Aubrey, suggesting the idea of undue familiarity. He answered the
voluble clerk therefore courteously, but with an evident disinclination
to prolong the conversation, and was quickly left alone. Poor
Aubrey's pride had taken the alarm. Was it possible that the man
had been presuming to give him a hint not to occupy much of the
Attorney-General's time? Was it even possible that it had been done in
consequence of an intimation from the Attorney-General himself? Oh,
no--his own good sense came presently to his assistance, and banished so
absurd a notion. There were three tables in the room, and each was laden
with briefs, some of them of prodigious bulk. Seven or eight very recent
ones were placed on the table opposite to which his vacant chair was
standing; the very sight of all this oppressed Aubrey: how could one
man's head manage so much? He was ruminating on such matters--and
especially upon the powerful, versatile, and practised intellect which
was requisite successfully to cope with such perpetually accumulating
difficulties, independently of the harassing responsibilities and
occupations of political office, when the Attorney-General entered. He
was a tall and handsome man, about forty-five, with an extremely
graceful and gentlemanlike carriage. There was a slight dash of
negligence in it; while his manner was fraught with cheerful composure.
He looked quite a man of the world; you would have thought that he could
have nothing to do but lounge at his club; ride round the Park; saunter
into the House of Lords for an hour or two; and then surrender himself
to the pleasures of society. There was not a trace of anxiety or
exhaustion about him; yet had he been engaged during the whole of the
preceding day conducting a very great political cause, (one of high
treason,) not having concluded his reply till nine o'clock at night!
There was a playful smile about his mouth; his ample forehead seemed
unfurrowed by a wrinkle; and his bright penetrating hazel eyes seemed
never the worse for wear with all the tens of thousands of brief sheets
on which they had travelled for the last twenty years.

"Ha--Aubrey--I'm a few minutes behind time, I'm afraid!--How are you?"
said he, with a cheerful air, grasping his saddened visitor very
cordially by the hand.

"Good-morning, Mr. Attorney--_Cum tot sustineas, et tanta negotia
solus_"--commenced poor Aubrey, pointing to the piles of briefs.

"Pho, my dear Aubrey; nonsense! _They've_ enough of my time, surely,
without grudging me half an hour's conversation with a friend--ah, ha!"
They were both quickly seated--and within a minute or two's time the
Attorney-General--_more suo_--had _got to business_--the business of the
visit. Aubrey perceived the rapidity of the movement; but nothing could
be _kinder_ than the manner of his companion, however distinct and
decisive his intimation that time was very precious. He approved
entirely of Mr. Aubrey's coming to the bar, and strongly recommended him
not to lose one day in entering upon the serious practical study of it;
informing him that, as an university man, within three years' time he
would be eligible to be called to the bar. "I'll call you myself,
Aubrey, if you will allow me," said he; but before that period had
arrived, he had taken his seat upon the Woolsack, as Lord High
Chancellor of England!

"Undoubtedly," said he, among other things, when pressed by Aubrey
about the difficulties to be encountered in adopting the legal
profession--"the acquisition of the _technical_ knowledge will be for
some little time rather troublesome; but a twelvemonth's steady study by
a man who is in earnest, and accustomed to real _work_, will make a vast
inroad on it. Everything you master, you see, helps to master so much
more. Three years' serious application to the law, by a man like you, my
dear Aubrey, will place you far a-head of the mob of men at the bar.
Besides, 'tis not the study but the _practice_ of the law that teaches
law most effectually.... Always have an eye to _principle_, referring
_everything_ to it. Resolve thoroughly to understand the smallest
details; and it will be a wonderful assistance in fixing them for
practical use in your mind, to learn as much as you can, of the
_reasons_ and _policy_ in which they originated. You'll find Reeves'
History of the English Law of infinite service to you; I should study it
in the evenings; 'tis full of interest and value in every point of view.
I read every word of it, very carefully, soon after I left college; and,
by the way, I'll tell you another book, by which I did the same--the
State Trials: ay, you could hardly believe me, if I were to tell you how
much I have read of them--speeches, examinations, cross-examination of
witnesses, reply, and summing up. That's where I first learned how to
examine and cross-examine a witness! Consider, the counsel employed
were, you know, generally first-rate men, and exerted themselves, on
such occasions, to the utmost, and the records of their procedure show
you the best possible style of doing business. And there you also learn
a great deal of _constitutional_ law.... You ask me how I get through so
much? To be sure, one _has_ enough to do, and I'm afraid I neglect a
good deal; but the great secret is--_attention_, and to _one thing_ at a
time. The sun's rays scattered are comparatively powerless; condense
them, they are irresistible:--but all this you know, Aubrey, as well
as, or better than I do.... Certainly, law is difficult; but its
difficulty is often greatly overrated, especially by imperfectly
educated, and ill-disciplined, _quick_, _sharp_ men. _You_ will find it
a very different matter. What is wanted is a clear head; a good memory;
strong common sense; fixity of purpose; an aptitude for analysis and
arrangement: before these combined, the difficulties of law fly like the
morning mist before the sun.--_Tact_ with the court, and a jury, is
acquired by practice, to a considerable extent, in the absence even of
natural endowments. And as for _you_, Aubrey--upon my honor, I've often
listened with great satisfaction to you in the House; few ever made
clearer statements of facts, or reasoned more closely and cogently than
you did; with practice, you would have become--and you soon will
become--a formidable debater. In your new profession you will find
_facts_ become quite different things from what they have ever hitherto
appeared; flexible, elastic, accommodating--you may do anything with
them--twist, and turn, and combine; ha! ha! Aubrey!" [Here the
Attorney-General laughed in the plenitude of his own conscious power.]
"In a word, Aubrey, if you _determine_ to get on at the bar, you _will_:
and if you can but get a bit of a _start_ at the beginning; now, for
instance, there's Runningtons' house--one of the very first in
London--why if _they_ would push you--your fortune's made. But you must
make up your mind to wait a little: you can't get into a great business
by a hop, step, and a jump, believe me. Certainly _I_ have no cause to
be dissatisfied; I've done pretty well; but I can tell you that eight
years passed over me before I earned enough a-year to pay my laundress!
With me, accident supplied the place of _connection_: but only suppose
how I must have worked in the mean time to be able to do business when
it came to me! I know it's said that I was always an idle man; but
people were a good deal mistaken about that matter, I can promise them!
What _idiots_, indeed, to suppose such a thing! Why, my very first start
lifted me into a business of a thousand a-year; and, in the name of
common sense, how could I have got through it, if I hadn't worked
beforehand? Bah!--Now, if Runningtons'--one of the first firms in the
profession--will stand by you, I'll guarantee your making £300 your
first year! and if they _won't_, why, don't despair, you'll have to wait
a little longer; but it will come at last, depend on it, if you continue
on the look-out! Besides, you can help _me_ a little bit, eh? It will be
a sort of introduction, you know; but we've time enough to see about
that.--I recommend you to get at once into the chambers of some
hard-working man, with a good deal of general business, particularly
Pleading--let me see"--Here the Attorney-General paused, and stroked his
chin for a moment or two in a musing manner, "Ah, yes, there's WEASEL,
the very man for your purpose. He's a good pleader, and a neat
draftsman; gets through his work very _cleanly_--ah! Weasel's a
clear-headed painstaking little fellow--all for law; and he's got a good
deal of it. He's not a very polished person, Weasel, ha! ha! but he's an
honorable, right-minded man--shall I introduce you? Well, by-and-by,
I'll walk over with you.--As to books? oh! why--I suppose you've looked
into Blackstone? He's a fine fellow, Blackstone, and deserves all that
has been said in his praise. Many think that he's only to be glanced at,
at the beginning of their studies; never believe it! He's good to the
end of the chapter! I've a profound respect for Blackstone; it's the
only book I've read four or five times through--ay, from cover to cover;
he makes law lovely! Stick to Blackstone by all means! Reeves--oh! I
mentioned _him_, you know. Then I should go, I think, to Coke on
Littleton; but we shall have several opportunities of talking over
_these_ matters. I really believe, Aubrey, that you are doing a very
wise thing in coming to the bar. If you've health, and the average
opportunities, (though I think you will have _more_,) I'll undertake to
say that in a few years' time you will realize an income--which _may_ be
a great one--but which (whatever it may be) you'll _earn_, as you did
not the one you've lost; and you'll enjoy it, my dear Aubrey, ten
thousand times more! All that I can do for you, I will--command me! By
the way," he added, assuming a somewhat anxious expression of
countenance and a manner very different from that free, buoyant,
off-hand one in which, for the last twenty minutes, he had been
speaking, (Aubrey feeling all the while the easy commanding power and
simplicity of the resplendent intellect with which he was communing,)
"I'm almost afraid to ask; but how do you come on, about the----Mesne
Profits?"

"I have heard nothing whatever about them, as yet," replied Aubrey,
sighing; his face suddenly overshadowed with gloom. A moment's pause
ensued; which was interrupted by the Attorney-General saying in a very
earnest and feeling manner, "I hope to Heaven you'll be able to get some
favorable arrangement made! You've not seen anything of Mr. Titmouse's
attorneys, I suppose?"

"Oh, no!" replied Aubrey, sighing, "nor heard anything from them!"

"_I've_ had very little to do with them; Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--these
are the people, eh?" Mr. Aubrey nodded. "Quirk is a stubborn
wooden-headed fellow--an old hedgehog! Egad! that man's compounded more
felonies, the old scamp, than any man in England! I should like to have
him in the witness-box for a couple of hours, or so! I think I'd tickle
him a little," said the Attorney-General, with a bitter smile. "They say
he's a confidential adviser to a sort of Thieves' Association! But
there's Gammon: I've had several things to do with _him_. He is a
superior man, that Gammon, a very superior man. A keen dog! I recollect
him being principal witness in a cause when I was for the plaintiff; and
he completely baffled Subtle--ah, ha, how well I recollect it!--Subtle
lost his temper at last, because he couldn't make Gammon lose _his_! Ah,
how cleverly the fellow twisted and turned with Subtle for nearly an
hour! ah, ha--Subtle looked so chagrined!--Have you seen Mr. Gammon?"

"No, I've had no occasion."

"He has a pleasing, gentlemanlike appearance; rather a striking face.
_He's_ the man you'll have to deal with in any negotiations on the
subject I named. You must mind what you're about with him. You mustn't
think me intrusive, Aubrey; but, have they sent in their bill yet?"

Mr. Aubrey involuntarily shuddered, as he answered in the negative.

"I'd give a trifle to know how the plague such people ever came to be
concerned in such a case. 'Tis quite out of their way--which is in the
criminal line of business!--They'll make their client pay for it through
the nose, I warrant him:--By the way, what an inconceivably ridiculous
little ass that Titmouse is--I saw him in court at York. If he'd only go
on the stage, and act _naturally_, he'd make his fortune as a
fool!"--Mr. Aubrey faintly smiled at this sally; but the topics which
the Attorney-General had just before touched upon, had not a little
oppressed his spirits.

"As this is comparatively an idle day with me," said the
Attorney-General, "and I've got ten minutes more at your
service--suppose I go with you at once--nothing like the present
moment--to Mr. Weasel's?"

"I am greatly obliged to you," replied Aubrey--and both rose to
go. "Say I shall be back in a few minutes," said the Attorney-General,
in answer to his clerk, who reminded him as he passed, that Mr.
Sergeant Squelch and Mr. Putty would be there in a moment or two's
time. As they crossed the court--"How do you do, Mr. Putty?" said the
Attorney-General, with lofty civility, to a grinning little confident
personage who met him, exclaiming with flippant familiarity,
"How do you do, Mr. Attorney?--Coming to your chambers--you don't
forget?--Consultation--eh?"

"I perfectly recollect it, Mr. Putty, I shall return presently. Perhaps,
if convenient, you will have the goodness to wait for a few
minutes"--replied the Attorney-General, somewhat stiffly, and passed on,
arm-in-arm with Mr. Aubrey.

"Now, that forward little imp's name, Aubrey, is Putty," whispered the
Attorney-General. "He was a glazier by trade; but just as he finished
his apprenticeship, an uncle left him a few hundred pounds, with
which--would you believe it?--nothing would suit him but decking himself
in a wig and gown, and coming to the bar--ah, ha!--The fellow's
creeping, however, into a little business, positively! They say he has a
cousin who is one of the officers to the sheriff of Middlesex, and puts
a good many little things in his way! He's my junior in an action of
libel against a newspaper, for charging his father-in-law--a baker who
supplies some workhouse with bread--with making it of only one-third
flour, one-third rye, and the remainder _saw-dust_--ah, ha, ha!--I dared
hardly look at the judges while I moved the Rule for a New Trial, for
fear of laughing! This is the case in which we're going to have the
consultation he spoke of--but here's Mr. Weasel's." They mounted a
narrow, dingy-looking, well-worn staircase--and on the first floor,
beheld "MR. WEASEL" painted over the door. On the Attorney-General's
knocking, as soon as his clear silvery voice was heard asking for Mr.
Weasel, and his dignified figure had been recognized by the clerk, who
had one pen in his mouth, and another behind his ear--that humble
functionary suddenly bent himself almost double three or four times; and
with flustered obsequiousness assured the great man that Mr. Weasel was
quite at liberty. The next moment the Attorney-General and Mr. Aubrey
were introduced into Mr. Weasel's room--a small dusky apartment
wretchedly furnished, the walls being lined with book-shelves, well
filled--and the table at which he was writing, and a chair on each side
of him, strewed with draft paper, which he was covering at a prodigious
rate. He was, in fact, drawing a "Declaration" in an action for a
_Breach of promise of Marriage_, (taking a hasty pinch of fiery Welsh
snuff every three minutes;) and his task seemed to be rendered very
difficult, by the strange conduct of the defendant--surely the most
fickle of mankind--who, with an extraordinary inconsistency, not knowing
his own mind for a day together, had promised to marry Miss M'Squint,
the heart-broken plaintiff, _firstly_, within a reasonable time;
_secondly_, on a given day; _thirdly_, on the defendant's return from
the Continent; _fourthly_, on the death of his father, (both of which
events were averred to have taken place;) _fifthly_, when the defendant
should have cut his wise teeth, (which it was averred he had;) and
lastly, on "_being requested_" by the lady--which it was averred she had
done, and in the most precise and positive manner, that she had been
_ready and willing, and then_ [what will the ladies say?] "_tendered and
offered herself to marry the said defendant_," who had then wholly
neglected and refused to do any such thing. One notable peculiarity of
the case was, that all these promises had been made, and all these
events appeared to have come to pass in one particular place--and that
rather an odd one, viz. in "_the parish of Saint Mary Le Bow, in the
ward of Cheap, in the city of London_."[16] If you had been better
acquainted with Mr. Weasel's associations and mode of doing business,
you would have discovered that, in _his_ imagination, almost all the
occurrences of life took place at this same spot! But to return--thus
was that astute little pleader engaged when they entered. He was a
bachelor, upwards of forty; was of spare make, of low stature, had a
thin, sharp, sallow face, and short stiff black hair; there was an
appearance about the eyes as if they were half-blinded with being
incessantly directed to white paper; he had a furrowed forehead, a small
pursed-up mouth--one hardly knew why, but really there was something
about his look that instantly suggested to you the image of the creature
whose name he bore. He was a ravenous lawyer, darting at the point and
pith of every case he was concerned in, and sticking to it--just as
would his bloodthirsty namesake at the neck of a rabbit. In _law_ he
lived, moved, and had his being. In his dreams he was everlastingly
spinning out pleadings which he never could understand, and hunting for
cases which he could not discover. In the daytime, however, he was more
successful. In fact, everything he saw, heard, or read of--wherever he
was, whatever he was doing, suggested to him questions of law, that
might arise out of it. At his sister's wedding (whither he had not gone
without reluctance) he got into a wrangle with the bridegroom, on a
question started by himself, (Weasel,) whether an _infant_ was liable
for goods supplied to his wife, before marriage. At his grandmother's
funeral he got into an intricate discussion with a puzzled proctor about
_bona notabilia_, with reference to a pair of horn spectacles, which the
venerable deceased had left behind her in Scotland, and a poodle in the
Isle of Man; and at church, the reading of the parable of the _Unjust
Steward_, set his devout, ingenious, and fertile mind at work for the
remainder of the service, as to the modes of stating the case,
now-a-days, against the offender, and whether it would be more advisable
to proceed civilly or criminally; and if the former, at law or in
equity. He was a hard-headed man; very clear and acute, and accurate in
his legal knowledge; every other sort he despised, if, indeed, he had
more than the faintest notion, from hearsay, of its existence. He was a
Cambridge man; and there had read nothing but mathematics, in which he
had made a decent figure. As soon as he had taken his degree, he
migrated to the Temple, where he had ever since continued engaged in the
study, and then the successful practice, of the law, as a special
pleader under the bar. He had a very large business, which he got
through ably and rapidly. He scarcely ever went into society; early want
of opportunity for doing so, had at length abated his desire for it--to
say nothing of his want of _time_. When, as was seldom the case, he
ventured out for a walk, he went, muttering to himself, at a postman's
pace, to get the greatest quantity of exercise in the smallest space of
time. He was not a bad-tempered man, but, from the absorbing and
harassing nature of his employments, he had become nervous, fidgety, and
irritable. His tone of voice was feeble, his utterance hesitating, his
manner hurried. What a laughable contrast between him and his visitor!
The Attorney-General coming to Mr. Weasel's chambers, suggested the idea
of a magnificent mastiff suddenly poking his head into the little kennel
of a querulous pug-dog; and I suppose Mr. Aubrey might be likened to a
greyhound accompanying the aforesaid mastiff! On seeing his visitors,
Mr. Weasel instantly got up with a blush of surprise, and a little hurry
and embarrassment of manner. His clerk put out a couple of chairs, and
down they sat. The Attorney-General came to the point in about half a
minute, and the matter was very quickly settled; it being arranged that
within a day or two's time, as soon as the forms necessary for admitting
Mr. Aubrey to an Inn of Court should have been completed, he should
commence his attendance at Mr. Weasel's, from ten o'clock till five
daily.

"It's a comical-looking little animal, isn't it?" quoth the
Attorney-General, with a laugh, as soon as they had got out of hearing.

"Certainly, I don't feel particularly prepossessed"----

"Oh, pho! He's the very man for you--the very man. There's no nonsense
with Weasel; you may learn an infinite deal of law from him, and that is
all you want. He's a very inoffensive fellow; and I've no doubt you'll
soon like his chambers greatly, if you're in earnest in studying the
law. You go or not, of course, as you choose; whatever you do is
perfectly voluntary; pay him his hundred guineas, and then, if you like,
you may get many thousand pounds' worth out of him in the twelvemonth.
Now, I _must_ bid you good-morning--I've really not another moment to
spare. God bless you, my dear Aubrey; and," he added with great
kindness, and a very pointed manner, "whenever you may think it worth
your while to talk over your affairs with me, come without notice or
ceremony--wherever I may be, I shall be delighted to see you!" Then they
parted. Mr. Aubrey was not aware of a certain stroke of delicacy and
generosity on the part of the Attorney-General; viz. that immediately on
the _Rule_ for a new trial being discharged, he had sent for Mr.
Runnington, and insisted on returning every sixpence of his
fees--upwards of six hundred guineas--desiring that Mr. Aubrey should
not be made acquainted with it, if by any means Messrs. Runnington could
conceal it from him!

A little fatigued and harassed by several important matters, which kept
him engaged till a late hour in the afternoon, he reached Vivian Street
in a depressed and desponding mood. Just as he turned the corner, he
beheld, at about twenty yards' distance, Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey
slowly walking homeward, on their return from the Park. Mrs. Aubrey held
Charles by the hand, who was dancing and frisking wildly about, and Miss
Aubrey's beautiful little Cato she was leading along by a slender chain.
They were in half-mourning; there was such an air of elegant simplicity
about them--their figures, their carriage, so easy and graceful! Aubrey,
as he neared them, gazed at them with mingled feelings of pride and
tenderness.

"Oh, my papa! my papa!" suddenly exclaimed Charles, who, happening to
turn round, had caught sight of his father, and ran eagerly down to him:
with what a thrill of love did he take in his arms the beautiful
breathless boy, and how his heart yearned towards his wife and sister,
as they also turned quickly round to meet him, after a long day's
absence! How inexpressibly dear were they to him--how, that day, he
enjoyed their quiet little dinner-table--the romp with his children
afterwards--and a long evening of eager and interesting conversation,
after the little ones had gone to bed, Mrs. Aubrey and Kate busy, the
while, with some slight matter of needlework! They had received several
letters from Yorkshire, which they read to him. One was from poor Dr.
Tatham, who, though he concealed a good deal that would have occasioned
needless pain, yet gave them a melancholy notion of the altered state of
things at the Hall. Though it was rather late before they retired to
rest on the evening of the ensuing Sunday, Mr. Aubrey was to be found
seated in his study by half-past four on Monday morning, perusing, with
profound attention, stimulated by the strong observation of the
Attorney-General, the second volume of Blackstone's Commentaries,--a
work with which he had already a very tolerable familiarity. 'Twas
really a thing to be thankful for that Mr. Aubrey, with so many
absorbing anxieties, such distracting apprehensions concerning the
future, _could_ command his attention in the way he did. To be sure, he
felt that it was plainly life-and-death work with him; but he might have
derived great encouragement from perceiving himself possessed of that
faculty of concentrating the attention, which the Attorney-General had
spoken of as so essential an attribute of a lawyer. The way in which he
parcelled out his time was this: From the time that he entered his study
till breakfast-time, he resolved to read law--from ten o'clock till four
or five, was to be spent at Mr. Weasel's chambers--and the evenings were
to be devoted to the society of his children, his wife, and sister, and
also to certain occasional literary efforts, from which he hoped to
derive some little increase to his means. This was severe work; but it
was probably the most fortunate and salutary thing in the world for
Aubrey, that his energies should be thus occupied, and his mind kept
from the corroding effects of constant reflection upon his misfortunes,
and dismal apprehensions concerning the future. After he had spent a few
days in Mr. Weasel's chambers, a good deal of his prejudice against that
gentleman began to wear off. Mr. Aubrey found him all that the
Attorney-General had described him as being--a very acute and able
lawyer, with a constant current of important, varied, and instructive
business running through his chambers, and every disposition to render
his utmost assistance to Mr. Aubrey, whom he quickly found out to be a
man of very superior intellect, and most seriously bent upon acquiring a
knowledge of the profession. Mr. Weasel was not blessed with the power
of formally communicating elementary knowledge; Mr. Aubrey had, as it
were, to _extort_ from him what he wanted, with something like a painful
effort. The real advantages of his position, were, the innumerable
practical hints and suggestions as to the mode of dealing with
miscellaneous business, which he derived from a watchful attention to
whatever passed in chambers--to the mode, in which Weasel hunted up and
applied his law, and reduced the facts involved in litigation into legal
shape and language, in the process of pleading. The penetrating eye of
Mr. Aubrey, thus closely fixed on everything that came under his notice,
quickly began to discover and appreciate the good sense, the practical
utility of most of the positive rules of law which he saw in operation;
and at the end of a fortnight or three weeks, he began to feel interest
in the study upon which he had so vigorously entered, and in which he
felt himself making real progress. Mr. Weasel, during even that time,
perceived the prodigious superiority of Mr. Aubrey over another pupil,
who had nearly completed his second year in Mr. Weasel's chambers, after
a twelvemonth spent in a conveyancer's; not, of course, in respect of
legal knowledge, but of intellectual power and aptitude for
business.--Mr. Aubrey would return to Vivian Street about six o'clock
each evening, a little fatigued with a very long day's work, (for he was
never later than five o'clock in entering his study, in the morning;)
but he was quickly cheered and refreshed by the sight of the fond and
lovely beings whom he there rejoined, and who had been counting the very
minutes till he returned. Every day knit that little family together, if
possible, in stronger bonds of love; for they clung to each other with a
feeling of having been thrust out of the great gay world together, and
sent, as it were, upon a pilgrimage afar, amid scenes of increasing
gloom, difficulty, and danger. Each day that bore them farther from that
of their expulsion from Yatton, mellowed, as it were, their
recollections of past scenes, and poured upon their wounded feelings the
soothing balm of pious resignation; and sometimes, also, faint and
trembling beams of hope concerning the future, would steal across the
gloomy chambers of their hearts. Thank God, the view of the past
presented to them no occasion for shame, for remorse, for
self-condemnation! They trusted that, in their day of wealth and
distinction, many as had been their shortcomings, they had not been
found wilfully neglecting the duties imposed upon them. Therefore they
derived a just consolation from a view of the past. But the
FUTURE--indeed--

    "Shadows, clouds, and darkness rested on it."

Their hearts involuntarily fluttered and shrank within them, when they
gazed upon the threatening gloom which hung over it. Their straitened
circumstances--an honorable poverty--had been a burden light, indeed, to
bear. They were very happy in one another's company; their house, though
small, was convenient, and even elegantly comfortable; they had health;
Mr. Aubrey had constant exercise for an active and vigorous mind, in the
acquisition of the learning of a noble profession, the practice of which
might possibly hereafter raise all of them to even affluence and
distinction--at all events, might secure them the substantial comforts
of life. But he would have moments of heaviness and trepidation. When
engaged in his little study, in the profound solitude and silence of the
early morning, while he was thus straining his faculties to their
utmost, on behalf of the sweet innocent beings--his wife--his
children--his sister--sleeping above, he would sometimes lean back in
his chair, with a very deep sigh, and sink into a revery--oh, how sad
and painful!--deepening occasionally into agony; but he would suddenly
arouse himself, and resume his studies with a powerful effort at
abstraction--with additional intensity of application.--How, indeed,
could he be otherwise than momentarily _paralyzed_, when he surveyed his
truly alarming, his tremendous pecuniary liabilities? Bills of
costs--Heaven only knew to what amount--due to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap; to his own attorneys, Messrs. Runnington; and to Mr.
Parkinson: and then--sickening and fearful object!--the Mesne
Profits--what _was_ to become of them all? The mind which, in the
presence of such disturbing forces as these, could apply its energies so
successfully as did that of Mr. Aubrey to the acquisition of knowledge,
with any degree of calmness, must surely have been of no common order,
and have undergone no slight discipline; but, alas! alas! what could all
this have availed him, unless he had been vouchsafed assistance from on
high? When the _waters were come in unto his soul_; when he was _sinking
in deep mire, where there was no standing_; when he was _come into deep
waters, where the floods overflowed him_--whither was he to look but to
one quarter, and that ABOVE, with earnest, and faithful, and constant
supplication to the Almighty?

The constant apprehension of very great evil--_suspense_--is a state
almost as terrible and insupportable, especially to those of lively
susceptibilities, as that produced by the infliction of the evil. Every
morning when Aubrey left home, he dreaded to think of what might happen
before his return; and when he quitted the Temple, he experienced a
sinking of the heart, when he thought of what might have transpired in
his absence. In fact, they all of them felt like those whom the ominous
silence and repose of surrounding nature--a portentous calm and gloom
overhead--fill with trembling apprehension of the coming storm. Their
fears are quickened by the occasional falling of large spreading drops
of rain through the sultry sky, not a breath of air stirring. Upward is
oft turned the pale cheek and apprehensive eye towards the black
accumulating clouds, from which may soon flame the destructive
lightning--what, in such a case, is there to rely upon, but the mercy of
Him around whose throne are clouds and darkness, and the whirlwind and
tempest His ordering?

The little family were sitting one morning at their usual early and
simple breakfast, and Mr. Aubrey was reading aloud, for his wife and
sister's suggestions, a second article which he had commenced
over-night, designed for a recently-established Review--having, some
fortnight before, sent off his first effort, about which, however, he
had as yet heard nothing; and Kate was playfully patting his cheek, and
telling him that, for all he might say to the contrary, a particular
expression was not, in her opinion, "_elegant English!_"

"It _is_, you pert puss," insisted Aubrey, with a good-natured laugh;
and then, turning to Mrs. Aubrey, "What do _you_ say, Agnes?"

"Oh--why--I really like it very much as it is."

"I sha'n't alter it," said Aubrey, laughing.

"Then I'll alter it when you're gone," quoth Kate, jauntily, and
bringing her beautiful laughing face so near his own, with a kind of air
of defiance, that he kissed her forehead, and said it should be as she
chose.

Just then a knock at the door announced a visitor, who proved to be Mr.
Runnington. Why it was they hardly knew; but they all slightly changed
color. He had called so early, he said, to insure seeing Mr. Aubrey
before he went to the Temple; and, though he had been shown into the
study, Mr. Aubrey insisted on his joining the breakfast-table.

"We've very plain fare for you, however," said he, as Mr. Runnington
yielded to his wishes.

Mr. Aubrey perceived, with some uneasiness, that the kind and
thoughtful countenance of Mr. Runnington wore rather an anxious
expression. And indeed so it was. When he looked at those who sat before
him--lovely, elegant, yet with a plainly forced cheerfulness--reflected
on the sufferings which they had passed through, and those which were
but too evidently in store for them--and for the first bitter instalment
of which he had come to prepare Mr. Aubrey--could he but feel very deep
sympathy for them? As soon as he had retired with Mr. Aubrey to the
study, in a low tone he explained his errand, which was to apprise him
that, the evening before, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's BILL had
come in.

"Well, show it me, if you please," said Mr. Aubrey, calmly, extending
his hand.

"My dear sir, why do you suppose I have it _with me_?" inquired Mr.
Runnington, with a concerned air. "You are not accustomed to such
matters--God forbid you should be! It is too bulky for me to have
brought with me, and lies at our office!"

"What is the _amount_ of it, then?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, dreading to
hear the answer; while Mr. Runnington took out of his pocket-book a slip
of paper, which he handed to Mr. Aubrey, and on which the latter
read--"£3,946, 14s. 6d." He gazed at it for some moments in silence, and
became very pale. Mr. Runnington could hardly bear to look at him, and
think of the two lovely women in the adjoining room, who were so
fearfully interested in the intelligence which had so dismayed Mr.
Aubrey.

"This is a very--large--amount," said the latter at length, with
suppressed emotion.

"It is a most serious affair," replied Mr. Runnington, shaking his head
and sighing.

"Then there is yours--and Mr. Parkinson's."

"Oh, Mr. Aubrey--_sufficient for the day is the evil thereof_."

"Will you oblige me by saying what is the probable amount of _your_
bill?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, with a calmness which seemed lent to him by
despair.

"Oh! I assure you we have thought nothing at all about it, nor shall we
for some time to come, Mr. Aubrey. We have not the slightest intention
of troubling ourselves, or you, with the matter till you may be in a
position to attend to it without serious inconvenience."

"But _do_ favor me with something like a _notion_," pressed the unhappy
Aubrey.

"Why--perhaps I am hardly doing right in mentioning it; but whenever our
bill is sent in, it will be less by some six hundred and fifty pounds,
by the noble generosity of the Attorney-General, who has returned all
his fees"----

"Returned all his fees!" echoed Mr. Aubrey, starting, while the color
rushed into his cheek, and the expression of his countenance was of
pride struggling with astonishment, and gratitude, and admiration. He
profoundly appreciated the conduct of his distinguished friend; and at
the same time felt a _totally new_ and very painful sense of pecuniary
obligation.

"I feel, Mr. Aubrey, that I have broken my promise to the
Attorney-General, who extracted from me a solemn pledge, to endeavor so
to manage the matter as that you should never know it. What is it, after
all--noble as it is--to the Attorney-General, with his £12,000 or
£15,000 a-year?"

"Oh--do not talk _so_, Mr. Runnington; I am overpowered, oppressed.
Never in all my life have I experienced feelings like those by which I
am now agitated!" He rose, and stood opposite the window for a few
minutes, neither of them speaking. Then he returned to his seat.

"How much does that leave me your debtor?"

"Why--really it is hard to say, unprepared--I should imagine--if you
will really force me to speak of such an unpleasant topic--that our
account is reduced to some £1,500 or £1,600--about which"----

"Then there is Mr. Parkinson's," said Aubrey, in a low tone, but with a
desperate air; presently adding--"Here are some £6,000 or £7,000 to
start with; and _then_ we come to the mesne profits--gracious, gracious
God!" he suddenly added with a visible shudder. He folded his arms
convulsively, and gazed, for a second or two, at Mr. Runnington, with an
eye, the expression of which was overpowering. In his face Mr.
Runnington beheld no longer the melancholy mildness to which he had been
accustomed, but a sternness and power were apparent in his features,
which Mr. Runnington had not imagined them capable of exhibiting. They
told of a strong soul thoroughly roused, and excited, and in agony. At
that moment a knocking was heard at the door, as of very little fingers.
"Come in!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, with unusual quickness and sternness.
He was obeyed--and Charles's little face peeped into the room timidly.
He was evidently quite startled by the tone in which he had been
addressed. "Come in, my child!" said Mr. Aubrey, rather tremulously,
when he saw that it was _his son_, and observed the apprehensiveness
overspreading his little features. Charles immediately advanced, with a
serious submissive air, saying--"This letter is just come--Mamma sent me
with it, dear papa"----

"Give it me, Charles," said Mr. Aubrey, extending his hand for it, while
with the other he gently placed the child upon his lap, and kissed him.
"I'm not angry with you, Charles," said he, tenderly.

"I've not been naughty, you know, dear papa!" said he, with innocent
surprise.

"No, no, my little love." The ruined FATHER could say no more; but
putting aside the child's flowing curly locks from his temples, as it
were mechanically, he gazed on his little face for a moment, and then
folded him in his arms with unspeakable tenderness. Mr. Runnington rose,
and stood for some moments gazing through the window, unwilling that his
own emotion should be observed. When Mr. Aubrey opened the letter, it
proved to be from the publisher of the Review to which he had sent his
article, enclosing a check for forty guineas, expressing an earnest
desire that he would continue his contributions, and assuring him that
the editor considered the article "in every way admirable." As soon as
he had glanced over the letter--"You little messenger of hope and
mercy!" he thought, again kissing his son, who sat passively gazing at
the agitated countenance of his FATHER--"I cannot, I will not despair!
You have brought me, as it were, a ray of light from heaven, piercing
the fearful gloom of my situation; 'tis a token, surely, that I am not
forgotten: I feel as though an angel, momentarily brightening the night
of sorrow, had come and whispered in my ear--'COURAGE!'" His features
began to resume their natural serenity of expression. "Take it in to
your mamma," said he, kissing little Charles, and despatching him with
the letter. Shortly afterwards, as soon as he had recovered the command
of his manner sufficiently to avoid occasioning uneasiness to Mrs. and
Miss Aubrey, he proposed to Mr. Runnington that they should walk towards
the Temple; and bidding adieu to those whom he left behind him, without
giving them an opportunity to ask him as to the nature of Mr.
Runnington's errand, but leaving them in high spirits at the letter
which he had sent in to them, he quitted the house arm-in-arm with Mr.
Runnington. I am persuaded that if that gentleman had had no one to
consult, he would, serious as was the amount of his claim, have
relieved Mr. Aubrey altogether from liability to _him_; but he had four
partners; their own pecuniary outlay had been considerable; the thing,
therefore, was practically quite out of the question. As they walked
along, in the course of much anxious conversation, Mr. Runnington told
Mr. Aubrey that he considered Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's bill to
be most outrageous and profligate in its charges; and that it might, on
taxation--a process which he explained to Mr. Aubrey--be reduced,
probably, by at least _one-half_. But he also reminded Mr. Aubrey of the
power which they held in their hands, in respect of the mesne profits;
and intimated his opinion, that in all probability they had constructed
their account with an eye to such considerations--namely, that it should
be discharged without rigorous scrutiny into its constituent items,
before they would listen to any proposed terms for the payment of the
mesne profits; and that Mr. Aubrey's position, with respect to Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, was one requiring the greatest possible
deliberation and circumspection on his part, especially in the matter of
the bill which had just been delivered in by them.

"I see! The whole," said Mr. Aubrey, "comes to this: they will relieve
me from liability to Mr. Titmouse, for as much of what may be due to
him, as they can divert into their own pockets!"

"That certainly seems very much like it," replied Mr. Runnington,
shrugging his shoulders; "but you will leave all such considerations and
matters to us; and rely on our vigilance and discretion. At what may
appear to us the exact moment for doing so with effect, depend upon our
most cautious interference. We know, Mr. Aubrey, the kind of people we
have to deal with. Mr. Titmouse is very likely to be merely a puppet in
their hands--at least in those of Mr. Gammon, who is a very long-headed
man; and with him, I have no doubt, our negotiations will have to be
carried on."

"That is just what the Attorney-General said--and he invited me,
moreover, to converse with him whenever I might consider that his advice
would be useful."

"Could you have a better adviser? He has a most penetrating sagacity,
long exercised--in short, his qualifications are consummate; and I
should not hesitate about consulting him in a friendly way, whenever we
feel at a loss."

"Why should I disguise anything from you, Mr. Runnington?"--said
Aubrey--"you ought to know the exact state of my affairs. I have a
little family plate, which I could not bear to part with; my books; and
the remnants of the furniture at Yatton, which I have saved in order to
furnish our present residence. Besides this, the outside of all that I
am possessed of--and I have no expectations, nor has my wife nor my poor
sister, from any quarter--is a sum of about £3,000 in the funds, and
£423 at my banker's. Those are my circumstances; they appall me merely
in stating them:--Why, I owe double the sum I have named, for lawyers'
bills only. I have not enough, without parting with my books and plate,
to discharge even Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's bill!"

"It would be cruel and absurd in me not to express at once, Mr. Aubrey,
my conviction that your situation is fearfully critical; and that your
sole hope is in the moderation which may be hoped for from Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, and their client, Mr. Titmouse. Serious as are,
at present, your other liabilities--to that one, of the mesne profits,
they are but as a bucket of water to the Thames. As we are talking, Mr.
Aubrey, in this candid and unrestrained manner, I will tell you my chief
source of apprehension on your account, with reference to Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap: namely, that they may possibly speculate on your
being able, if placed in real peril, to call around you, in your
extremity, a host of wealthy and powerful friends--as security, or
otherwise"--

"They will find themselves, then, utterly mistaken," said Mr. Aubrey,
sternly. "If they and their client are really capable of such shocking
brutality--such wanton oppression--let them do their worst: I am
resigned. Providence will discover a shelter for my poor wife and
children, and my dear, devoted, high-spirited sister; and as for myself,
rather than satiate the rapacity of such wretches, by plundering
good-natured and generous friends, I will spend the remainder of my days
in prison!"

Mr. Aubrey was evidently not a little excited while he said this; but
there was that in his tone of voice, and in his eye, which told Mr.
Runnington that he meant what he said; and that, as soon as it should
have come to the point of oppression and injustice, no man could resist
more powerfully, or endure with a more dignified and inflexible
resolution. But Mr. Runnington expressed strong hopes that it would not
come to such an issue. He consoled Mr. Aubrey with assurances that, as
for their own demand, it might stand over for years; and that so, he was
sure, would it be with the far lesser demand of Mr. Parkinson; and that
if, by a great effort, sufficient could be raised to discharge promptly
the bill of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, some much more favorable
arrangement respecting the amount and mode of payment of the mesne
profits might be effected--leaving Mr. Aubrey, in the mean time, leisure
to apply himself vigorously to his studies for the bar, for which Mr.
Runnington assured him that he considered him peculiarly qualified; and
pledged himself to back him with all the influence he had, or could
command.

"Gracious Heaven, Mr. Runnington!" said Aubrey, with a little
excitement, "is it not very nearly intolerable that I should pass the
prime of my days in thraldom to such people as these, and be encircled
by the chains of such a man as this Titmouse is represented as being? I
will not call myself his foe, nor his victim; but I am the one through
whose sudden destitution he has obtained a splendid fortune. I did not
_knowingly_ deprive him of it--he must be bereft of all the ordinary
feelings of humanity, to place me, whom he has already stripped of all,
upon the rack--the rack of extortion! Oh! put me in his place, and him
in mine--do you think I would not have been satisfied with what I had
gained? Would _I_ have alarmed and tortured him by calling for an
account of what he had spent with a firm, a reasonable persuasion that
it was his own--profoundly unconscious of its being another's? Oh, no! I
would not only have forgiven him all, but endeavored to secure him from
future want!" He sighed. "Oh, that I were at this moment a free man!
_pauper--sed in meo ære_; that I had but five hundred pounds to keep
me and mine for a year or two--with a mind at ease, and fit for study!
but here we are at the Temple. When shall we meet again--or shall I hear
from you?"

"Very shortly," replied Mr. Runnington, who for the last few minutes had
been listening to Mr. Aubrey in respectful and sympathizing silence; and
shaking him warmly by the hand, with much cordiality and fervency of
manner, he pledged himself to do all in his power to promote his
interests.




CHAPTER VIII.


When Mr. Aubrey arrived at Mr. Weasel's chambers, he looked dejected and
harassed; yet, exerting his powers of self-command, he at once addressed
himself, calmly and vigorously, to the business of the day. From time to
time he peremptorily excluded the distressing thoughts and recollections
arising out of his morning's interview with Mr. Runnington; and
succeeded in concentrating his attention upon a case of more than usual
intricacy and multifariousness of details, which Mr. Weasel, having
glanced over, had laid aside for a more leisurely perusal. He handed it,
however, to Mr. Aubrey soon after his arrival, with something
approaching to a secret satisfaction, in the expectation of its "proving
too much for him;" but he was mistaken. Mr. Aubrey left a little earlier
than usual; but not before he had sent in the voluminous "case" to Mr.
Weasel's room by the clerk, together with a half-sheet of draft paper,
containing a brief summary of the results at which he had arrived; and
which not a little surprised Mr. Weasel. The case did not happen to
involve much technical knowledge; but, as well in respect of the
imperfect manner in which it was drawn up, as of the confusion worse
confounded of the transactions themselves, out of which the questions
arose, there were required persevering attention, strength of memory,
and great clear-headedness. In short, Weasel owned to himself that Mr.
Aubrey had taken a very masterly view of the case; and how would his
estimate of his pupil's ability have been enhanced, by a knowledge of
the situation in which he was placed--one so calculated to distract his
attention, and prevent that hearty and complete devotion to legal
studies, without which Mr. Weasel well knew how vain was the attempt to
master them?

"Have you read Aubrey's opinion on that troublesome case--I mean the
Cornish Bank?" inquired Weasel, taking a pinch of snuff, of Mr.
Thoroughpace, another pupil who had just sat down beside Mr. Weasel, to
see him "settle" [_i. e._ score out, interline, and alter] a pleading
drawn by the aforesaid Thoroughpace. That gentleman replied in the
negative. "He's got a headpiece of his own, I can tell you!---Egad,
somehow or another, he always contrives to hit the nail on the head!"

"I'd a sort of notion, the very first day he came, that he was a
superior man," replied Thoroughpace. "He makes very few notes--seems to
trust entirely to his head"----

"Ah! a man may carry that too far," interrupted Mr. Weasel, thrusting a
pinch of snuff up his nose.

"Then I wish _I_ could," replied Thoroughpace. "Isn't there such a thing
as making _the hand engross the business of the head_?" Mr.
Weasel--recollecting that in his library stood twelve thick folio
volumes of manuscript "precedents," which he had been fool enough to
copy out with his own hand during his pupilage, and the first year or
two of his setting up in business--hemmed, and again applied to his
snuff-box. "How do you get on with Aubrey in the pupils' room?" he
inquired.

"Why, I didn't like him at first. Very reserved, and is not without
_hauteur_. Even now, though very courteous, he says little, appears
entirely absorbed by his studies; and yet he seems to have something or
other pressing on his mind."

"Ah! I dare say! Law's no trifle, I warrant him! No doubt it's
_teasing_ him!" replied Weasel, rather complacently.

"Do you know I should doubt it! I never saw a man to whom it seemed to
_yield_ so easily.--He's a particularly _gentlemanlike_ person, by the
way; and there's something very attractive in his countenance. He seems
highly connected."

"Oh--why, you've heard of the great cause of _Doe_ d. _Titmouse_ v.
_Jolter_, a Yorkshire ejectment case, tried only last spring
assizes?--That case, you know, about the effect of an _erasure_.--Well,
he's the defendant, and has, I hear, lost everything."

"You astonish me! By Jove, then, he had need work!"

"Shall _we_ set to work, Mr. Thoroughpace?" said Weasel, suddenly,
looking at his watch lying on his desk. "I've promised to let them have
these pleas by six o'clock--or the other side will be signing judgment;"
and plunging his pen into the inkstand, to work he went, _more suo_, as
if such a man as his pupil, Mr. Aubrey, had never existed. Weasel was
not at all a hard-hearted man; but I verily believe that if a _capias ad
satisfaciendum_ (_i. e._ final process to take the body into custody to
satisfy debt and costs) against Charles Aubrey, Esquire, had come into
Mr. Weasel's chambers to be "_settled_" as requiring special
accuracy--after humming and hawing a bit--and taking an extra pinch of
snuff, he would have done his duty by the document faithfully, marked
his _seven-and-sixpence_ in the corner, and sent it out indifferently
with other papers; consoling himself with this just reflection, that the
thing _must_ be done by _somebody!_ and he might as well have the _fee_
as any one else!

On Mr. Aubrey's return home to dinner, he found that his sister had
received another long letter from Dr. Tatham, to which was appended a
postscript mentioning Mr. Gammon in such terms as suggested to Mr.
Aubrey a little scheme which he resolved to carry into effect on the
morrow--namely, to call himself at the office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap, and seek an interview with Mr. Gammon, who, Dr. Tatham stated,
had quitted Yatton for town only the day before the doctor had written
to Miss Aubrey. After a very restless and unhappy night, during which he
was tormented by all kinds of dismal dreams, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap figuring in each as the stern and mysterious arbiters of his
earthly destiny, he resolved to put an end to his present insupportable
suspense--to learn at once the extent of what he had either to hope or
to fear--by calling that very afternoon at Saffron Hill. For that
purpose, he quitted Mr. Weasel's at the early hour of three o'clock; and
straightway bent his steps towards those delectable localities--through
Fetter Lane to Hatton Garden, thence inquiring his way to Saffron Hill.
He was not long in finding the house of which he was in quest, his eye
being soon attracted by the great, gleaming brass-plate with the words
"QUIRK, GAMMON, and SNAP," as prominent and threatening as ever those
names had appeared to Titmouse in the day of _his_ agony and suspense.
_He_ had stood gazing at them with idiot longing and vulgar
apprehension, as the reader has seen. How very different a person now
looked at them with feelings of intense interest and overmastering
anxiety, as at the names of those who had him completely in their
power--his fortunes, his _liberty_, his livelihood, and that of the dear
beings whose interests, whose all on earth, whose personal safety--were
bound up in his! Mr. Aubrey, with a jaded air, dressed in a buttoned
black surtout, and with an umbrella under his arm, entered the hall,
where were sitting and standing several strange-looking people--one or
two suffering evidently great agitation; in fact, relatives of prisoners
whose trials for capital offences were coming on the next day at
Newgate--and made his way into a room, on the door of which he read
"Clerks' Room."

"Now, sir, your name and business?" said a showily dressed
Jewish-looking youth, with copious curls, lolling at a desk from which
he did not move, and speaking in a tone of very disagreeable assurance.

"Is Mr. Gammon within? my name is Aubrey," he added, taking off his hat;
and there was a certain _something_ in his voice, countenance, and
bearing--a certain courtly superiority--which induced the personage whom
he had addressed to slip off his stool, and exhibit as polite an air as
_he_ could possibly assume.

"Mr. Gammon is in his room, sir, and alone. I believe he is rather
busy," said the youth, going towards Mr. Gammon's room--"but I've no
doubt you can see him."

The fact was, that at that very moment Mr. Gammon was engaged drawing up
"Instructions to prepare Declaration" in an action for mesne profits
against Mr. Aubrey! He had only the day before returned from Yatton,
where circumstances had occurred which had quickened their intended
proceeding against that unfortunate gentleman--that being the first
quarter to which, at Mr. Titmouse's suggestion, they were to look for a
considerable supply of ready money. That morning, in the very room into
which Mr. Aubrey was to be presently shown, had taken place a long
discussion between Mr. Quirk and Mr. Gammon, on the very subject which
had now brought to their office Mr. Aubrey. Mr. Quirk was for making
short work of it--for "going straight a-head"--and getting the whole
£60,000 or security for the greater portion, and £20,000 down! Gammon,
however, was of opinion that that was mere madness; that by attempting
to proceed to extremities against so unfortunate a sufferer as Mr.
Aubrey, they could not fail of drawing down on themselves and their
client universal execration--(at _that_, Quirk only grunted and
grinned;) and, moreover, of driving Mr. Aubrey desperate, and forcing
him either to quit the country, or accept the protection of the
insolvent laws--at this Mr. Quirk looked serious enough. Gammon had, in
the end, satisfied his senior partner that their only chance was in
gentleness and moderation; and the old gentleman had, as usual, agreed
to adopt the plan of operations suggested by Gammon. The latter
personage had quite as keen a desire and firm determination as the
former, to wring out of their wretched victim the very last farthing
which there was the slightest probability of obtaining; for Titmouse had
pointed to that quarter for the discharge of his ten thousand pound
bond, and bill of costs (which--by the way--contained some three hundred
items, slightly varied in language, which stood also charged in their
bill to Mr. Aubrey!) then twenty--or at least fifteen thousand pounds,
were to be handed over to himself, Titmouse; and all the rest that could
be got, Mr. Gammon might appropriate to his own use. Such was the
prospective partition of the spoil!--Mr. Gammon's inquiries into Mr.
Aubrey's circumstances, had completely convinced him, however, that it
would be impossible to extract any considerable sum from that
unfortunate gentleman; and that if they could contrive to get payment of
their bill against him--perhaps substantial security for a portion--say
four or five thousand pounds--of the mesne profits; and his own personal
responsibility for the payment of any portion of the remainder,
hereafter--they had better rest satisfied--and look for liquidation of
their own heavy claim, to a mortgage upon the Yatton estates. Mr. Gammon
had also proposed to himself certain other objects, in dealing with Mr.
Aubrey, than the mere extraction of money from him; and, in short,
prompted by considerations such as those above intimated, he had come to
the determination, an hour or so before Mr. Aubrey's most unexpected
visit, to be at once prepared with the necessary means for setting in
motion legal proceedings for the recovery of the arrear of mesne
profits. But we are keeping Mr. Aubrey waiting, all this while, in the
outer office.

"Have I the honor to address Mr. Gammon?" commenced Mr. Aubrey,
courteously, on being shown into the room--not announced by name, but
only as "_a gentleman_"--where Gammon sat busily engaged writing out the
"Instructions" for framing the rack on which it was designed to extend
his unconscious visitor!

"Sir, my name _is_ Gammon," he replied, coloring a little--and rising,
with an expression of very great surprise--"I believe I have the honor
of seeing Mr. Aubrey?--I beg you will allow me to offer you a chair"--he
continued with forced calmness of manner, placing one as far distant as
was possible from the table, and, to make assurance doubly sure, seating
himself between Mr. Aubrey and the table; expecting to hear his visitor
at once open the subject of their bill, which they had so recently sent
in.

"Will you suffer me, Mr. Aubrey," commenced Gammon, with a bland and
subdued air, not fulsome, but extremely deferential, "before entering on
any business which may have brought you here, to express deep and
sincere sympathy with your sufferings, and my _personal_ regret at the
share we have had in the proceedings which have ended so adversely for
your interests? But our duty as professional men, Mr. Aubrey, is often
as plain as painful!"

"I feel obliged, sir," said Mr. Aubrey, with a sigh, "for your kind
expressions of sympathy--but I cannot for a moment conceive any apology
necessary. Neither I, nor my advisers, that I am aware of, have ever
had cause to complain of harsh or unprofessional treatment on your part.
Your proceedings certainly came upon me--upon all of us--like a
thunder-stroke," said Mr. Aubrey, with a little emotion. "I trust that
you have given me credit, Mr. Gammon, for offering no vexatious or
unconscientious obstacles."

"Oh, Mr. Aubrey! on the contrary, I am at a loss for words to express my
sense of your straightforward and high-minded conduct; and have several
times intimated my sentiments on that subject to Messrs.
Runnington"--Mr. Aubrey bowed--"and again I anxiously beg that you will
give me credit for feeling the profoundest sympathy"--he paused, as if
from emotion; and such might well have been excited, in any person of
ordinary feeling, by the appearance of Mr. Aubrey--calm and
melancholy--his features full of anxiety and exhaustion, and his figure,
naturally slender, evidently somewhat emaciated.

["I wonder," thought Gammon, "whether he has any _insurances on his
life_!--He certainly has _rather_ a consumptive look--I should like to
ascertain the fact--and in what office--and to what extent."]

"I trust, most sincerely, Mr. Aubrey, that the mental sufferings which
you must have undergone, have not affected your health?" inquired
Gammon, with an air of infinite concern.

"A little, certainly, sir, but, thank God, I believe not materially; I
never was very robust," he replied with a faint sad smile.

["_How like his sister!_"--thought Gammon, watching his companion's
countenance with real interest.]

"I am not quite sure, Mr. Gammon," continued Aubrey, "that I am
observing etiquette in thus coming to you, on a matter which you may
consider ought to have been left to my solicitors, and who know nothing
of my present visit--but"----

"An honorable mind like yours, Mr. Aubrey, may surely act according to
its own impulses with safety! As for etiquette, I know of no
professional rule which I break, in entering into a discussion with you
of any topic connected with the action which has recently been
determined," said Gammon, cautiously, and particularly on his guard, as
soon as his penetrating eye had detected the acuteness which was mingled
with the sincerity and simplicity of character visible in the oppressed
countenance of Mr. Aubrey.

"I dare say you can guess the occasion of my visit, Mr. Gammon?"

["There goes _our bill_!--Whew!--What now?" thought Gammon.]

Mr. Gammon bowed, with an anxious, expectant air.

"I allude to the question yet remaining between your client, Mr.
Titmouse, and me--the mesne profits"----

"I feared--I expected as much! It gave me infinite anxiety, as soon as I
found you were approaching the subject!"

"To me it is really a matter of life and death, Mr. Gammon. It is one
pressing me on, almost to the very verge of despair!"

"Do not, Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, in a tone and with a look which
touched the heart of his agitated companion, "magnify the mischief.
Don't--I beg--imagine your position to be one so hopeless! What is there
to stand in the way of an amicable adjustment of these claims? If I had
my way, Mr. Aubrey--and if I thought I should not be acting the part of
the unjust steward in Scripture--I would write sixty thousand farthings
for sixty thousand pounds!"

"You have named the sum for which I believe I am legally liable to Mr.
Titmouse," said Mr. Aubrey, with forced composure; "it is, however, a
sum as completely out of my power to pay or secure--or even a quarter of
it--as to give him one of the stars."

"I am aware, Mr. Aubrey, that you must have had many calls upon you,
which must have temporarily crippled your resources"----

"Temporarily!" echoed Mr. Aubrey, with a sickening smile.

"I devoutly trust that it _is_ only temporary! For your own and family's
sake," he added quickly, observing the watchfulness with which his every
look and word was regarded by his companion. "Any proposal, Mr. Aubrey,"
he continued with the same apparent kindness of manner, but with serious
deliberation, "which you may think proper to make, I am ready--eager--to
receive and consider in a liberal spirit. I repeat--If I, only, had to
be consulted--you would leave this room with a lightened heart; but to
be plain and candid, our client, Mr. Titmouse, is a very difficult
person to deal with! I pledge my word of honor to you--[_Oh Gammon!
Gammon! Gammon!_]--that I have repeatedly urged upon Mr. Titmouse to
release you from all the rents which had been received by you previously
to your having legal notice of the late proceedings." I suppose Gammon
felt that this declaration was not received as implicitly as he desired,
and had expected; for with a slight stiffness, he added, "I assure you,
sir, that it is a fact. I have always been of opinion that the law is
harsh, and even faulty in principle, which, in such a case as
yours--where the possessor of an estate, to which he believed himself
born, is ousted by a title of which he had no previous knowledge, nor
MEANS of knowledge"--Gammon uttered this very pointedly, and with his
eye fixed searchingly upon that of Mr. Aubrey--"requires him to make
good the rents which he had so innocently appropriated to his own use.
That is my _opinion_, though it may be wrong. I am bound to say,
however, that as the law now stands--if Mr. Titmouse should, contrary to
my advice, determine to stand upon his strict rights"----Gammon paused,
shook his head, shrugged his shoulders, and looked with melancholy
significance at Mr. Aubrey.

"I am entirely at his mercy! that I perfectly understand. I do trust,
however, that in the name of our common humanity he will have some
consideration for the helpless--the miserable situation in which I am so
unexpectedly placed," said Aubrey, with mournful energy. "Never having
imagined it necessary to save money"----

"Oh no--nor, with such an income as yours was, to resort, I fear, to any
of the ordinary modes of providing against emergencies--by _insurance_
of your life, for instance"--interposed Gammon, sighing.

"No--sir! nothing of the sort"--["Ah!--the deuce you have not!" thought
Gammon]--"and I confess--I now bitterly feel--how improvident I have
been! My situation is so deplorable and desperate, that disguise would
be absurd, even could I stoop to it; and I declare, in the presence of
Heaven, Mr. Gammon, that without giving up the little remnant of plate I
have preserved, and my books, I am unable to liquidate even the amount
of your bill sent in the day before yesterday"--Gammon gazed at Aubrey
mournfully, but in silence--"and if my miserable remnant of means _be_
so appropriated, we are _literally beggars_"--he paused, and his voice
faltered.

"Indeed--indeed, you distress me beyond measure, Mr. Aubrey," said
Gammon, in a low tone.

"If you can but secure me, sir--and that is the object of this intrusion
upon you--a merciful interval, to prepare myself for the profession
which I have entered--the bar--whatever earnings I might obtain, after
leaving a bare maintenance for myself and family, shall be devoted
faithfully to liquidate the heavy claims upon me! For myself, Mr.
Gammon, I do not care about living upon bread and water for the next ten
years; but there are others"--his voice trembled. "Sir," he suddenly
added with almost passionate energy, "by every consideration which can
influence a gentleman, I conjure you to interfere between me and utter
immediate ruin!"

This was the real thrilling language of the heart; but it failed to
produce the least impression upon Gammon, in whom it excited only
intense chagrin and disappointment. "Oh, that it were but in my power,"
said he, however, with great energy, "to send you out of this room a
free man! If I alone were to be consulted," he continued with vivacity,
"I would instantly absolve you from all demands--or at least give you
your own time, and take no other security than your word and honor!"

"Oh! what a happy--happy man! what a happy family should we be if
only"----he could not finish the sentence, for he was greatly moved.

["Here's an infernal business!" thought Gammon to himself, and, bending
down his head, he covered his eyes with his hands;--"worse, far worse
than I had suspected. I would take five pounds for all _my_ residuary
interest in the sixty thousand pounds!! I've not the least doubt that
he's speaking the truth. But the _bill_ part of the business is highly
unsatisfactory! I should like my friend Quirk to be here just now!
Surely, however, Mr. Aubrey must be able to get security? With such
friends and connections as his!--If one could only get one or two of
them to join him in a bond for ten thousand pounds--stay--that won't
exactly do either--by the way--I _must_ have my thumb upon him!"]

"I am so profoundly affected by the situation in which you are placed,
Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, at length appearing to have subdued his
emotion, and feeling it necessary to say something, "that I think I may
take upon myself to say the instructions which we have received _shall
not_ be acted upon, come what may. Those must be really monsters, not
men, Mr. Aubrey, who could press upon one in your position; and that
such should be attempted by one who has succeeded to your former
splendid advantages, is inconceivably shocking. Mr. Aubrey, _you shall
not be crushed_--indeed you shall not, so long as I am a
member--possibly not the least influential one--of this firm, and have
any weight with your formidable creditor, Mr. Titmouse. I cannot do
justice to my desire to shelter you and yours, Mr. Aubrey, from the
storm you dread so justly!" There was a warmth, an energy in Gammon's
manner, while saying all this, which cheered the drooping heart of his
wretched visitor. "What I am about to say, Mr. Aubrey, is in complete
confidence," continued Gammon, in a low tone. Mr. Aubrey bowed, with a
little anxious excitement in his manner. "May I rely implicitly upon
your honor and secrecy?"

"Most implicitly, sir. What you desire me to keep within my own breast,
no one upon earth shall know from _me_."

"There are serious difficulties in the way of serving you. Mr. Titmouse
is a weak and inexperienced young man, naturally excited to a great
pitch by his present elevation, and already embarrassed for want of
ready money. You may imagine, sir, that his liabilities to us are of
considerable magnitude. You would hardly credit, Mr. Aubrey, the amount
of mere money out of pocket for which he stands indebted to us; our
outlay during the last two years having considerably crippled our own
pecuniary resources in an extensive practice like ours, and driven us to
incur responsibilities which are beginning to occasion us personally
considerable anxiety. Of course, Mr. Aubrey, we must look to Mr.
Titmouse to be speedily reimbursed: he insists upon our immediately
calling upon you; and I have reason to suspect that he has at his elbow
one or two very heartless advisers, who have suggested this to him; for
he follows it most pertinaciously. That he cannot meet the liabilities I
have alluded to out of his annual income, without swallowing it up
entirely for eighteen months or two years, is certain. I regret to say
that Mr. Quirk and Mr. Snap encourage his disposition to press you;--do
not be alarmed, my dear sir!" he continued, observing the deadly
paleness of Mr. Aubrey, whose eye was riveted upon that of Gammon; "for
I declare that _I will_ stand between you and them; and it is enough for
me to say, moreover, that I have the _power_ of doing so. I am--but this
is committed specially and sacredly to your confidence--_the only person
living who happens to possess the means of controlling Mr. Titmouse_;
and since you have entered this room, I have resolved to _exercise_ my
powers. Now, bearing in mind that I have no legal authority from him,
and am, at the same time, only one of a firm, and assuring you that I am
entailing a serious personal responsibility upon myself in what I am
doing, let me throw out for your consideration my general notion of what
I think ought to be done--merely my off-hand notion."

"I perfectly understand you, sir--and am penetrated by a sense of
gratitude! I listen to you with inexpressible anxiety," said Mr. Aubrey.

"Had I been consulted," continued Mr. Gammon, "we should have proposed
to you, with reference to our bill, (which I frankly acknowledge
contains a much more liberal entry than would probably be allowed on
taxation, but with equal truth I declare that it is none of _my_
doing,")--Gammon knew the credit for candor which this acknowledgment of
a fact, of which Messrs. Runnington would quickly apprise Mr. Aubrey
after examining the bill, was likely to obtain for him with Mr.
Aubrey--"I say, I should have _proposed_ to you, in the first instance,
the payment of our bill by easy instalments, during the next three or
four years, provided you could have obtained partial security. But I am
only one of three, and I know the determination of Mr. Quirk and Mr.
Snap, not to listen to any proposal with reference to the mesne profits
which is not based upon--in short, they say, _the bill must be paid at
once without being looked into_--I mean," he added quickly, "without its
being subjected to the harassing and protracted scrutiny which a
distrustful, an ungrateful client, or unreasonable opponent, has it too
frequently in his power to inflict. Oh, let me disguise nothing from
you, my dear sir, in a conversation of this kind between two gentlemen!"
continued Gammon, with an admirable air of frankness, for he perceived
that Mr. Aubrey looked slightly staggered. "I am ashamed to acknowledge
that our bill does contain exorbitant entries--entries which have led to
very frequent and fierce disputes between me and my partners. But _what
is to be done_? Mr. Quirk is--to be completely candid with you--the
moneyed man of the firm; and if you were but to glance at the articles
of our partnership"--Gammon shrugged his shoulders and sighed--"you
would see the tyrannical extent of power over us which he has thereby
secured! You observe how candid I am--perhaps foolishly so."

["I've not quite mastered him--I can tell it by his eye"--thought
Gammon--"is this a game of chess between us? I wonder whether, after
all, Messrs. Runnington are aware of his being here--knowing and
trusting to his ability--and have put him thoroughly on his guard? He is
checking strong feelings incessantly, and evidently weighing every word
I utter. Misery has sharpened faculties naturally acute."]

"Pray do not say so, Mr. Gammon, I fully appreciate your motives. I am
devoured with anxiety for an intimation of the nature of the terms which
you were about, so kindly, to specify."

"_Specify_, Mr. Aubrey, is perhaps rather too strong a term--but to
proceed. Supposing the preliminary matter which I have alluded to
satisfactorily arranged, I am disposed to say, that if you could find
security for the payment of the sum of ten thousand pounds within a
year, or a year and a half"--[Mr. Aubrey's teeth almost chattered at the
mention of it]--"I--I--that is, _my_ impression is--but--I repeat--it is
only _mine_"--added Gammon, earnestly--"that the rest should be left to
your own honor, giving at the same time a personal undertaking to pay at
a future--a very distant day--in the manner most convenient to
yourself--the sum of ten thousand pounds more--making in all only
one-third of the sum due from you; and receiving an absolute release
from Mr. Titmouse in respect of the remaining two-thirds, namely, forty
thousand pounds."

Mr. Aubrey listened to all this with his feelings and faculties strung
to the utmost pitch of intensity; and when Gammon had ceased,
experienced a transient sense, as if the fearful mountain which had
pressed so long on his heart were moving.

"Have I made myself intelligible, Mr. Aubrey?" inquired Gammon, kindly,
but very gravely.

"Perfectly--but I feel so oppressed and overwhelmed with the magnitude
of the topics we are discussing, that I scarcely at present appreciate
the position in which you would place me. I must throw myself, Mr.
Gammon, entirely upon your indulgence!"

Gammon looked a little disappointed.

"I can imagine your feelings, sir," said he, as, thrusting into a heap
the papers lying on the table, he threw them into a drawer, and then
took a sheet of paper and a pencil; and while he made a few memoranda of
the arrangement which he had been mentioning, he continued--"You
see--the grand result of what I have been hastily sketching off is--to
give you ample time to pay the amount which I have named, and to relieve
you, at once, _absolutely_ from no less a sum than FORTY THOUSAND
POUNDS," said he, with emphasis and deliberation, "for which--and with
interest--you will otherwise remain liable to the day of your
death;--there can be no escape," he continued with pointed significance
of manner--"except, perhaps, into banishment, which, with your feelings,
would be worse than death--for it would--of course--be a _dishonorable_
exile--to avoid just liabilities;--and those who bear your name would,
in such an"----

"Pray, sir, be silent!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, in a tone and manner which
electrified Gammon, who started in his chair. Mr. Aubrey's face was
whitened; his eye glanced lightning at his companion. Dagon-like, Gammon
had put forth his hand and touched the ark of Aubrey's honor. Gammon
lost his color, and for, perhaps, the first time in his life, quailed
before the majesty of man; 'twas also the majesty of suffering; for he
had been torturing a noble nature. Neither of them spoke for some
time--Mr. Aubrey continuing highly excited--Gammon gazing at him with
unfeigned amazement. The paper which he held in his hand rustled, and he
was obliged to lay it down on his lap, lest Mr. Aubrey should notice
this evidence of his agitation.

"I am guilty of great weakness, sir," said at length Mr. Aubrey--his
excitement only a little abated. He stood erect, and spoke with stern
precision; "but you, perhaps unconsciously, provoked the display of it.
Sir, I am ruined; I am a beggar: we are all ruined; we are all beggars:
it is the ordering of God, and I bow to it. But do you presume, sir, to
think that at last my HONOR is in danger? and consider it necessary, as
if you were warning one whom you saw about to become a criminal, to
expatiate on the nature of the meditated act by which I am to disgrace
myself and my family?" Here _that family_ seemed suddenly standing
around him: his lip quivered; his eyes filled; he ceased speaking; and
trembled with excessive emotion.

"This is a sally equally unexpected, Mr. Aubrey, and, permit me to add,
unwarrantable," said Gammon, calmly, having recovered his
self-possession. "You have entirely misunderstood me, sir; or I have
ill-explained myself. Your evident emotion and distress touch my very
soul, Mr. Aubrey." Gammon's voice trembled. "Suffer me to tell
you--unmoved by your violent rebuke--that I feel an inexpressible
respect and admiration for you, and am miserable at the thought of one
word of mine having occasioned you an instant's uneasiness." When a
generous nature is thus treated, it is apt to feel an excessive
contrition for any fault or extravagance which it may have committed--an
excessive appreciation of the pain which it may have inflicted on
another. Thus it was, that by the time Gammon had done speaking, Mr.
Aubrey felt ashamed and mortified at himself, and conceived an
admiration of the dignified forbearance of Gammon, which quickly
heightened into respect for his general character as it appeared to
Aubrey, and fervent gratitude for the disposition which he had evinced,
from first to last, so disinterestedly to serve a ruined man. He seemed
now to view all that Gammon had proposed in quite a new light--through
quite another medium; and his excited _feelings_ were in some danger of
disturbing his _judgment_.

"As I am a man of business, Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, shortly
afterwards, with a very captivating smile--how frank and forgiving
seeming his temper, to Aubrey!--"and this is a _place_ for business,
shall we resume our conversation? With reference to the first ten
thousand pounds, it can be a matter of future arrangement as to the mode
of securing its payment; and as for the remaining ten thousand, if I
were not afraid of rendering myself personally liable to Mr. Titmouse
for neglecting my professional duty to him, I should be content with
your verbal promise--your mere word of honor, to pay it, as and when you
conveniently could. But in justice to myself, I really must take a
_show_ of security from you. Say, for instance, two promissory notes,
for £5,000 each, payable to Mr. Titmouse. You may really regard them as
matters of mere form; for, when you shall have given them to me, they
will be deposited _there_," (pointing to an iron safe,) "and not again
be heard of until you may have thought proper to inquire for them. The
influence which I happen to have obtained over Mr. Titmouse, you may
rely upon my exercising with some energy, if ever he should be disposed
to press you for payment of either of the instruments I have mentioned.
I tell you candidly that they must be _negotiable_ in point of form; but
I assure you, as sincerely, that I will not permit them to be
negotiated. _Now_, may I venture to hope that we understand each other?"
added Gammon, with a cheerful air; "and that this arrangement, if I
shall be only able to carry it into effect, is a sufficient evidence of
my desire to serve you, and will relieve you from an immense load of
anxiety and liability?"

"An immense--a crushing load, indeed, sir, if Providence shall in any
manner (to me at present undiscoverable) enable me to perform _my_ part
of the arrangement, and if _you_ have but power to carry your views into
effect," replied Mr. Aubrey, sighing heavily, but with a look of
gratitude.

"Leave that to _me_, Mr. Aubrey; I will undertake to do it; I will move
heaven and earth to do it--and the more eagerly, that I may thereby hope
to establish a kind of set-off against the misery and loss which my
professional exertions have unfortunately contributed to occasion
you--and your honored family!"

"I feel deeply sensible of your very great--your unexpected kindness,
Mr. Gammon; but still, the arrangement suggested is one which occasions
me dreadful anxiety as to my being ever able to carry out _my_ part of
it."

"Never, never despair, Mr. Aubrey! Heaven helps those who help
themselves; and I really imagine I see your powerful energies already
beginning to surmount your prodigious difficulties! When you shall have
slept over the matter, you will feel the full relief which this proposed
arrangement is so calculated to afford your spirits. Of course, too, you
will lose no time in communicating to Messrs. Runnington the nature of
the proposal. I can predict that they will be not a little disposed to
urge upon you its completion. I cannot, however, help once more
reminding you, in justice to myself, Mr. Aubrey, that it is _but_ a
proposition, in making which, I hope it will not prove that I have been
carried away by my feelings much further than my duty to my client or
his interests "----

Mr. Aubrey was afraid to hear him finish the sentence, lest the faint
dawn of hope should disappear from the dark and rough surface of the sea
of trouble upon which he was being tossed. "I _will_ consult, as you
suggest, sir, my experienced and honorable professional advisers; and
am strongly inclined to believe that they will feel as you predict. I am
of course bound to defer to _them_,"----

"Oh, certainly! certainly! I am very strict in the observance of
professional etiquette, Mr. Aubrey, I assure you; and should not think
of going on with this arrangement, except with their concurrence, acting
on your behalf. One thing I have to beg, Mr. Aubrey, that either you or
they will communicate the result of your deliberations to _me_,
personally. I am very desirous that the suggested compromise should be
broken to my partners and our client by _me._--By the way, if you will
favor me with your address, I will make a point of calling at your
house, either late in the evening or early in the morning."

[As if Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap had not kept eagle eyes upon his
every movement since quitting Yatton, with a view to any sudden
application for a writ of _Ne Exeas_, which a suspicious approach of his
towards the sea-coast might render necessary!]

"I am infinitely obliged to you, sir--but it would be far more
convenient for both of us, if you could drop me a line, or favor me with
a call at Mr. Weasel's, in Pomegranate Court in the Temple."

Gammon blushed scarlet: but for this accidental mention of the name of
Mr. Weasel, who was one of the pleaders occasionally employed by Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap in heavy matters--in all probability Mr. Aubrey
might, within a day or two's time, have had to exercise his faculties,
if so disposed, upon a declaration of Trespass for Mesne Profits, in a
cause of "TITMOUSE _v._ AUBREY!"

"As you choose, Mr. Aubrey," replied Gammon, with difficulty concealing
his feelings of pique and disappointment at losing the opportunity of a
_personal introduction by Mr. Aubrey to his family_. After a few words
of general conversation, Gammon inquiring how Mr. Aubrey liked his new
profession, and assuring him, in an emphatic manner, that he might rely
upon being supported, from the moment of his being called to the bar, by
almost all the common-law business of the firm of "Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap"--they parted. It had been to Mr. Aubrey a memorable interview--and
to Gammon a somewhat arduous affair, taxing to an unusual extent his
great powers of self-command, and of dissimulation. As soon as he was
left alone, his thoughts instantly recurred to Aubrey's singular burst
of hauteur and indignation. Gammon had a stinging sense of submission to
superior energy--and felt indignant with himself for not having at the
moment resented it. Setting aside this source of exquisite irritation to
the feelings of a proud man, he felt a depressing consciousness that he
had not met with his usual success in his recent encounter with Mr.
Aubrey; who had been throughout cautious, watchful, and courteously
_distrustful_. He had afforded occasional glimpses of the unapproachable
pride of his nature--and Gammon had crouched! Was there anything in
their interview--thought he, walking thoughtfully to and fro in his
room--which, when Aubrey came to reflect upon--for instance--had Gammon
disclosed too much concerning the extent of his influence over Titmouse?
His cheek slightly flushed; a sigh of fatigue and excitement escaped
him; and gathering together his papers, he began to prepare for quitting
the office for the day.

Mr. Aubrey left Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's office with feelings
of mingled exhaustion and despondency. As he walked down Saffron Hill--a
dismal neighborhood!--what scenes did he witness! Poverty and profligacy
revelling, in all their wild and revolting excesses! _Here_, was an
Irishman, half-stupefied with liquor and bathed in blood, having just
been rescued from a savage fight in a low underground public-house
cellar, by his squalid wife, with dishevelled hair and a filthy infant
in her arms--who walked beside him cursing, pinching, and striking
him--reproaching him with the knowledge that she and her seven children
were lying starving at home. Presently he stumbled; she with her
wretched infant falling down with him; and she lay striking, and
scratching, and abusing him till some one interfered.

_There_, was a woman--as it were a bloated mass of filth steeped in
gin--standing with a drunken smile at an old-clothes stall, pawning a
dirty little shirt, which she had a few minutes before stripped from the
back of one of her four half-naked children!

A little farther on, was a noisy excited crowd round two men carrying a
shutter, on which was strapped the bleeding body (a handkerchief spread
over the face) of a poor bricklayer, who had fallen a few minutes before
from the top of some scaffolding in the neighborhood, and was at that
instant in the agonies of death--leaving behind him a wife and nine
children, for whom the poor fellow had long slaved from morning to
night, and who were now ignorant of the frightful fate which had
befallen him, and that they were left utterly destitute.

_There_, was a skinny little terrified urchin, about eight years old,
with nothing to conceal his dirty, half-starved body, but a tattered
man's coat, pinned round him; dying with hunger, he had stolen a
villanous-looking bare bone--scarce a halfpenny worth of meat upon it;
and a brawny constable, his knuckles fiercely dug into the poor little
offender's neck, (with his tight grasp,) was leading him off, followed
by his shrieking mother, to the police-office, whence he would be
committed to Newgate; and thence, after two or three months'
imprisonment, and being flogged--miserable little wretch!--by the common
hangman, (who had hanged the child's father some six months before,) he
would be discharged--to return probably several times and undergo a
similar process; then to be transported; and finally be hanged, as had
been his father before him.

These startling scenes passed before Mr. Aubrey, in the course of a five
minutes' walk down Saffron Hill--during which period he now and then
paused, and gazed around him with feelings of pity, of astonishment, of
disgust, which presently blended and deepened into a dark sense of
horror. These scenes, to some so fatally familiar--_fatally_, I mean, on
account of the INDIFFERENCE which familiarity is apt to induce--to Mr.
Aubrey, had on them all the frightful glare of _novelty_. He had never
witnessed anything of the sort before; and had no notion of its
existence. The people residing on each side of the Hill, however, seemed
accustomed to such scenes; which they appeared to view with the same
dreadful indifference with which a _lamb led to the slaughter_ is beheld
by one who has spent his life next door to the slaughter-house. The Jew
clothesman, before whose shop-window, arrested by the horrifying
spectacle of the bleeding wretch borne along to the hospital--Mr. Aubrey
had remained standing for a second or two--took the opportunity to
assail him, with insolent and pertinacious importunities to purchase
some articles of clothing! A fat baker, and a greasy eating-house
keeper, stood each at his door, one with folded arms, the other with his
hands thrust into his pockets--both of them gazing with a grin at two
curs fighting in the middle of the street--oh, how utterly insensible to
the ravenous want around them! The pallid spectres haunting the
gin-shop--a large splendid building at the corner--gazed with sunken
lack-lustre eye, and drunken apathy, at the shattered man who was being
borne by.

Ah, God! what scenes were these! And of what other hidden wretchedness
and horror did they not indicate the existence! "Gracious mercy!"
thought Aubrey, "what a world have I been living in! And this dismal
aspect of it exposed to me just when I have lost all power of relieving
its wretchedness!"--here a thrill of anguish passed through his
heart--"but woe, woe is me! if at this moment I had a thousand times ten
thousand a-year, how far would it go amid the scenes similar to this,
_abounding_ in this one city? Oh God! what unutterable horror must be in
store for those who, intrusted by Thee with an overflowing abundance,
disregard the misery around them in guilty selfishness and indolence,
or"--he shuddered--"expend it in sensuality and profligacy! Will DIVES
become sensible of his misconduct, only when he shall have entered upon
his next stage of existence, and of punishment? Oh, merciful Creator!
how is my heart wrung by the sight of horrors such as these? Awful and
mysterious Author of our existence, _Father of the spirits of all
flesh_, are these states of being which Thou hast ordained? Are these
Thy children? Are these my fellow-creatures? Oh, help me! help me! my
weak heart faints; my clouded understanding is confounded! I
cannot--insect that I am!--discern the scope and end of Thy economy, of
Thy dread government of the world; yet blessed be the name of my God!--I
KNOW that _thou reignest!_ though _clouds and darkness are around thee!_
_righteousness and judgment are the habitation of thy throne!_ _with
righteousness shalt thou judge the world_, AND THE PEOPLE WITH EQUITY!"

Like as the lesser light is lost in the greater, so, in Aubrey's case,
was the lesser misery he suffered, merged in his sense of the greater
misery he witnessed. What, after all, was his position, in comparison
with that of those now before and around him? What cause of thankfulness
had he not, for the merciful mildness of even the dispensations of
Providence towards him? Such were his thoughts and feelings, as he stood
gazing at the objects which had called them forth, when his eye lit on
the figure of Mr. Gammon approaching him. He was threading his way,
apparently lost in thought, through the scenes which had so powerfully
affected Mr. Aubrey; who stood eying him with a sort of unconscious
intensity, as if secure from his observation, till he was actually
addressed by him.

"Mr. Aubrey!" exclaimed Gammon, courteously saluting him. Each took off
his hat to the other. Though Aubrey hardly intended it, he found himself
engaged in conversation with Gammon, who, in a remarkably feeling tone,
and with a happy flattering deference of manner, intimated that he could
guess the subject of Mr. Aubrey's thoughts, namely, the absorbing
matters which they had been discussing together.

"No, it is not so," said Mr. Aubrey, with a sigh, as he walked
on--Gammon keeping easily beside him--"I have been profoundly affected
by scenes which I have witnessed in the immediate neighborhood of your
office, since quitting it; what misery! what horror!"

"Ah, Mr. Aubrey!"--exclaimed Gammon, echoing the sigh of his companion,
as they slowly ascended Holborn Hill, separate, but side by side--"what
a checkered scene is life! Guilt and innocence--happiness and
misery--wealth and poverty--disease and health--wisdom and
folly--sensuality and refinement--piety and irreligion--how strangely
intermingled we behold them, wherever we look on life--and how
difficult, to the philosopher, to detect the principle"----

"Difficult?--Impossible! Impossible! God alone can do so!"--exclaimed
Mr. Aubrey, thoughtfully.

"Comparison, I have often thought," said Gammon, after a pause--"of
one's own troubles with the greater misfortunes endured by others, is
beneficial or prejudicial--consolatory or disheartening--according as
the mind of him who makes the comparison is well or ill
regulated--possessed or destitute, of moral and religious principle!"

"It is so, indeed," said Mr. Aubrey. Though not particularly inclined to
enter into or prolong conversation, he was pleased with the tone of his
companion's remark.

"As for me," proceeded Gammon, with a slight sigh--"the absorbing
anxieties of professional life; and, too, in a line of professional life
which, infinitely to my distaste, brings me constantly into scenes such
as you have been observing, have contributed to render me, I fear, less
sensible of their real character; yet can I vividly conceive the effect
they must, when first seen, produce upon the mind and heart of a
compassionate, an observant, a reflecting man, Mr. Aubrey!"

Gammon looked a gentleman; his address was easy and insinuating, full of
delicate deference, without the slightest tendency to cant or
sycophancy; his countenance was an intellectual and expressive one; his
conversation that of an educated and thinking man. He was striving his
utmost to produce a favorable impression on Mr. Aubrey; and, as is very
little to be wondered at, he succeeded. By the time that they had got
about twenty yards beyond Fetter Lane, they might have been seen walking
together, arm-in-arm. As they approached Oxford Street, they suddenly
encountered Mr. Runnington.

"God bless me, Mr. Aubrey!" said he, surprisedly--"and Mr. Gammon? How
do you do, Mr. Gammon?"--he continued, taking off his hat with a little
formality, and speaking in a corresponding tone; but he was encountered
by Gammon with greatly superior ease and distance, and was not a little
nettled at it; for he was so palpably foiled with his own weapons.

"Well--I shall now resign you to your legitimate adviser, Mr. Aubrey,"
said Gammon, with a smile; then, addressing Mr. Runnington, in whose
countenance pique and pride were abundantly visible--"Mr. Aubrey has
favored me with a call to-day, and we have had some little discussion on
a matter which he will explain to you. As for me, Mr. Aubrey, I ought to
have turned off two streets ago--so I wish you good-evening."

Mr. Aubrey and he shook hands as they exchanged adieus: Mr. Runnington
and he simply raised each his hat, and bowed to the other with cold
politeness. As Mr. Runnington and Mr. Aubrey walked westward together,
the former, who was a very cautious man, did not think fit to express
the uneasiness he felt at Mr. Aubrey's having entered into anything like
confidential intercourse with one whom he believed to be so subtle and
dangerous a person as Mr. Gammon. He was, however, very greatly
surprised when he came to hear of the proposal which had been made by
Mr. Gammon, concerning the mesne profits; which, he said, was so
unaccountably reasonable and liberal, considering the parties by whom it
was made, that he feared Mr. Aubrey must be lying under some mistake. He
would, however, turn it anxiously over in his mind, and consult with his
partners; and, in short, do whatever they conceived best for Mr.
Aubrey--that he might depend upon. "And, in the mean time, my dear sir,"
added Mr. Runnington, with a smile designed to disguise considerable
anxiety, "it may be as well for you not to have any further personal
communication with these parties, whom you do not know as well as we do;
but let _us_ negotiate with them in everything, even the very least!"
Thus they parted; and Mr. Aubrey entered Vivian Street with a
considerably lighter heart than he had ever before carried into it. A
vivid recollection of the scenes which he had witnessed at Saffron Hill,
caused him exquisitely to appreciate the comforts of his little home,
and to return the welcomes and caresses which he received, with a kind
of trembling tenderness and energy. As he folded his still blooming but
somewhat anxious wife fondly to his bosom, kissed his high-spirited and
lovely sister, and fondled the prattling innocents who came clambering
up upon his lap, he forgot, for a while, the difficulties but remembered
the _lessons_, of the day.

We must, however, now return to Yatton, where some matters had
transpired which are not unworthy of being recorded. Though Mr. Yahoo
paid rather anxious court to Mr. Gammon, who was very far too much for
him in every way, 'twas plain that he dreaded and disliked, as much as
he was despised by, that gentleman. Mr. Gammon had easily extracted from
Titmouse evidence that Yahoo was endeavoring, from time to time,
artfully to set him against his protector, Mr. Gammon. This was
_something_; but more than this--Yahoo, a reckless rollicking villain,
was obtaining a growing ascendency over Titmouse, whom he was rapidly
initiating into all kinds of vile habits and practices; and, in short,
completely corrupting him. But, above all, Gammon ascertained that Yahoo
had already commenced, with great success, his experiments upon the
purse of Titmouse. Before they had been a week at Yatton, down came a
splendid billiard-table with its appendages from London, accompanied by
a man to fix it--as he did--in the library, which he quickly denuded of
all traces of its former character; and here Yahoo, Titmouse, and
Fitz-Snooks would pass a good deal of their time. Then they would have
tables and chairs, with cards, cigars, and brandy and water, placed upon
the beautiful "soft, smooth-shaven lawn," and sit there playing
_écarté_, at once pleasantly soothed and stimulated by their cigars and
brandy and water, for half a day together. Then Yahoo got up frequent
excursions to Grilston, and even to York; where, together with his two
companions, he had "great sport," as the newspapers began to intimate
with growing frequency and distinctness. Actuated by that execrable
licentiousness with reference to the female sex, by which he was
peculiarly distinguished, and of which he boasted, he had got into
several curious adventures with farmers' girls, and others in the
vicinity of Yatton, and even among the female members of the
establishment at the Hall; in which latter quarter Fitz-Snooks and
Titmouse began to imitate his example. Mr. Gammon had conceived a horrid
loathing and disgust for the miscreant leader into these enormities;
and, but for certain consequences, would have despatched him with as
much indifference as he would have laid arsenic in the way of a bold
voracious rat, or killed a snake. As it was, he secretly caused him to
experience, on one or two occasions, the effects of his good-will
towards him. Yahoo had offered certain atrocious indignities to the
sweetheart of a strapping young farmer; whose furious complaints coming
to Mr. Gammon's ears, that gentleman, under a pledge of secrecy, gave
him two guineas to be on the look-out for Yahoo, and give him the best
taste he could of a pair of Yorkshire fists. A day or two afterwards,
the Satyr fell in with his unsuspected enemy. Yahoo was a strongly-built
man, and an excellent bruiser; but was at first disposed to shirk the
fight, on glancing at the prodigious proportions of Hazel, and the fury
flaming in his eyes. The instant, however, that he saw the fighting
attitude into which poor Hazel had thrown himself, Yahoo smiled,
stripped, and set to. I am sorry to say that it was a good while before
Hazel could get one single blow at his accomplished opponent; whom,
however, he at length began to wear out. Then he gave the Yahoo a
miserable pommelling, to be sure; and finished by knocking out five of
his front teeth, viz. three in the upper, and two in the under
jaw--beautifully white and regular they certainly had been; and the loss
of them caused him great affliction on the score of his appearance, and
also, not a little interfered with the process of cigar-smoking. It
would, besides, have debarred him, had he been so disposed, from
enlisting as a soldier, inasmuch as he could not bite off the end of his
cartridge: wherefore, it would seem, that Hazel had committed the
offence of _Mayhem_.[17] Mr. Gammon condoled heartily with Mr. Yahoo, on
hearing of the brutal attack which had been made upon him; and as the
assault had not been committed in the presence of a witness, strongly
recommended him to bring an action of trespass _vi et armis_ against
Hazel, which Gammon undertook to conduct to--a nonsuit. While they were
conversing in this friendly way together, it suddenly occurred to Gammon
that there was another service which he could render to Mr. Yahoo, and
with equally strict observance of the injunction, _not to let his left
hand know what his right hand did_; for he loved the character of a
secret benefactor. So he wrote up a letter to Snap, (whom he knew to
have been treated very insolently by Yahoo,) desiring him to go to two
or three Jew bill-brokers and money-lenders, and ascertain whether they
had any paper by them with the name of "Yahoo" upon it:--and in the
event of such being discovered, he was to act in the manner pointed out
by Gammon. Off went Snap like a shot, on receiving this letter; and the
very first gentleman he applied to, viz. a Mr. SUCK'EM DRY, proved to be
possessed of an acceptance of Yahoo's for £200, for which Dry had given
only twenty-five pounds, on speculation. He readily yielded to Snap's
offer, to give him a shy at Mr. Yahoo _gratis_--and put the document
into the hands of Snap; who forthwith delivered it, confidentially, to
Swinddle Shark, gent., one &c., a little Jew attorney in Chancery Lane,
into whose office the dirty work of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap was
swept--in cases where they did not choose to appear. I wish the
mutilated Yahoo could have seen the mouthful of glittering teeth that
were displayed by the hungry Jew, on receiving the above commission. His
duties, though of a painful, were of a brief and simple description.
'Twas a plain case of _Indorsee_ v. _Acceptor_. The affidavit of debt
was sworn the same afternoon; and within an hour's time afterwards, a
thin slip of paper was delivered into the hands of the under-sheriff of
Yorkshire, commanding him to take the body[18] of Pimp Yahoo, if he
should be found in his bailiwick, and him safely keep--out of harm's
way--to enable him to pay £200 _debt_ to Suck'em Dry, and £24, 6s. 10d.
_costs_ to Swindle Shark. Down went that little "infernal machine" to
Yorkshire by that night's post.

Nothing could exceed the astonishment and concern with which Mr. Gammon,
the evening but one afterwards, on returning to the Hall from a ride to
Grilston, heard Titmouse and Fitz-Snooks--deserted beings!--tell him
how, an hour before, two big vulgar fellows, one of them with a long
slip of paper in his hands, had called at the Hall, asked for the
innocent unsuspecting Yahoo, just as he had made an admirable
_coup_--and insisted on his accompanying them to the house of one of the
aforesaid bailiffs, and then on to York Castle. They had brought a
tax-cart with them for his convenience; and into it, between his two new
friends, was forced to get the astounded Yahoo--smoking, as well as he
could, a cigar, with some score or two of which he had filled all his
pockets, and swearing oaths enough to have lasted the whole neighborhood
for a fortnight at least. Mr. Gammon was quite shocked at the indignity
which had been perpetrated, and asked why the villains had not been kept
till he could have been sent for. Then, leaving the melancholy Titmouse
and Fitz-Snooks to themselves for a little while, he took a solitary
walk in the elm avenue, where--grief has different modes of expressing
itself--he relieved his excited feelings by reiterated little bursts of
gentle laughter. As soon as the _York True Blue_ had, among other
intimations of fashionable movements, informed the public that "_The
Hon._ Pimp Yahoo" had quitted Yatton Hall for York Castle, where he
intended to remain and receive a large party of friends--it was
gratifying to see how soon, and in what force, they began to muster and
rally round him. "_Detainers_"[19]--so that species of visiting cards is
called--came fluttering in like snow; and in short, there was no end of
the messages of civility and congratulation which he received from those
whom, in the season of his prosperity, he had obliged with his valuable
countenance and custom.

Ah me, poor Yahoo, completely done! Oft is it, in this infernal world of
ours, that the best concerted schemes are thus suddenly defeated by the
envious and capricious fates! Thus were thy arms suddenly held back from
behind, just as they were encircling as pretty, plump a pigeon as ever
nestled in them with pert and playful confidence, to be plucked! Alas,
alas! And didst thou behold the danger to which it was exposed, as it
fluttered upward unconsciously into the region where thine affectionate
eye detected the keen hawk in deadly poise? Ah me! Oh dear! What shall I
do? What can I say? How vent my grief for the Prematurely Caged?

Poor Titmouse was very dull for some little time after this sudden
abduction of this bold and brilliant spirit, and spoke of bringing an
action, at the suggestion of Fitz-Snooks, against the miscreant who had
dared to set the law in motion at Yatton, under the very nose of its
lord and master. As soon, however, as Gammon intimated to him that all
those who had lent Yahoo money, might now rely upon that gentleman's
honor, and whistle back their cash at their leisure, Titmouse burst out
into a great rage; telling Gammon that he, Titmouse, had only a day or
two before lent Yahoo £150!! and that he was a "cursed scamp," who had
known, when he borrowed, that he could not repay; and a Detainer, at the
suit of "Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq.," was one of the very earliest that
found its way into the sheriff's office; this new creditor becoming one
of the very bitterest and most relentless against the fallen Yahoo,
except, perhaps, Mr. Fitz-Snooks. That gentleman having lent the amiable
Yahoo no less a sum than thirteen hundred pounds, remained easy all the
while, under the impression that certain precious documents called
"I.O.U.'s" of the said Yahoo were as good as cash. He was horribly
dismayed on discovering that it was otherwise; that _he_ was not to be
paid before all other creditors, and immediately; so he also sent a very
special message in the shape of a Detainer, backed by a great number of
curses.

In process of time Mr. Yahoo bethought himself of getting
"_white-washed_;" but when he came to be inspected, it was considered
that he was not properly _seasoned_; so the operation was delayed for
two years, under a very arbitrary statute, which enacted, "that if it
should appear that the said prisoner had contracted any of his debts
_fraudulently_, or by means of _false pretences_, or _without having had
any reasonable or probable expectation, at the time when contracted, of
paying the same_," &c. &c. &c., "or should be indebted for damages
recovered in any _action for criminal conversation_, or _seduction_, or
for _malicious injuries_, &c. &c., such prisoner should be discharged as
to such debts and damages, so soon only as he should have been in
custody at the suit of such creditors for a period or periods not
exceeding two years." Such is the odious restraint upon the liberty of
the subject, which at this day, in the nineteenth century, is suffered
to disgrace the statute law of England; for, in order to put _other
Yahoos_ upon their guard against the cruel and iniquitous designs upon
them, I here inform them that the laws under which Mr. Yahoo suffered
his two years' incarceration, (every one of his debts, &c., coming under
one or other of the descriptions above mentioned,) are, _proh pudor_!
re-enacted and at this moment in force, and in augmented stringency,[20]
as several most respectable gentlemen, if you could only get access to
them, would tell you.

Yahoo having been thus adroitly disposed of, Mr. Gammon had the
gratification of finding that mischievous simpleton, Fitz-Snooks, very
soon afterwards take his departure. He pined for the pleasures of the
town, which he had money enough to enjoy for about three years longer,
with economy; after which he might go abroad, or to _the dogs_--wherever
they were to be found. 'Twas indeed monstrous dull at Yatton; the game
which Yahoo had given him a taste for was so very _strictly preserved_
there! and the birds so uncommon shy and wild, and strong on the wing!
Besides, Gammon's presence was a terrible pressure upon him; overawing
and benumbing him, in spite of several attempts which he had made, when
charged with the requisite quantity of wine, to exhibit an impertinent
familiarity, or even defiance. As soon as poor Titmouse had bade
Fitz-Snooks good-by, shaken hands with him, and lost sight of
him--Titmouse was at Yatton, _alone with Gammon_, and felt as if a spell
were upon him.--He was completely cowed and prostrate. Yet Gammon laid
himself out to the very uttermost, to please him, and reassure his
drooping spirits. Titmouse had got into his head that the mysterious and
dreadful Gammon had, in some deep way or other, been at the bottom of
Yahoo's abduction, and of the disappearance of Fitz-Snooks, and would,
by-and-by, do as much for _him_! He had no feeling of _ownership_ of
Yatton; but of being, as it were, only tenant-at-will thereof to Mr.
Gammon. Whenever he tried to reassure himself, by repeating that it did
not signify--for Yatton was his own--and he might do as he liked; his
feelings might be compared to a balloon, which, with the eyes of eager
and anxious thousands upon it, yet cannot get inflated sufficiently to
rise one inch from the ground. How was it? Mr. Gammon's manner towards
him was most uncommonly respectful; what else could he wish for? Yet he
would have given a thousand pounds to that gentleman to take himself
off, and never show his nose again at Yatton! It annoyed him, too, more
than he could express, to perceive the deference and respect which every
one at the Hall manifested towards Mr. Gammon. Titmouse would sometimes
stamp his foot, when alone, with childish fury on the ground, when he
thought of it. When at dinner, and sitting together afterwards, Gammon
would rack his invention for jokes and anecdotes to amuse Titmouse--who
would certainly give a kind of laugh; exclaim, "Bravo! Ha, ha! 'Pon my
life!--capital!--By Jove! Most uncommon good! you don't say so?"--and go
on, drinking glass after glass of wine, or brandy and water, and smoking
cigar after cigar, till he felt fuddled and sick, in which condition he
would retire to bed, and leave Gammon, clear and serene in head and
temper, to his meditations. When, at length, he broached the subject of
_their bill_--a frightful amount it was; of the moneys advanced by Mr.
Quirk, for his support for eight or nine months on a liberal scale, and
which mounted up to a sum infinitely larger than could have been
supposed; and lastly, of the bond for ten thousand pounds, as the just
reward to the firm for their long-continued, most anxious, and
successful exertions on their client's behalf--Titmouse mustered up all
his resolution, as for a last desperate struggle; swore they were
robbing him; and added, with a furious snap of the fingers, "they had
better take the estate themselves--allow him a pound a-week, and send
him back to Tag-rag's." Then he burst into tears, and cried like a
child, long and bitterly.

"Well, sir," said Gammon, after remaining silent for some time, looking
at Titmouse calmly, but with an expression of face which frightened him
out of his wits, "if this is to be really the way in which I am to be
treated by you--I, the only _real disinterested_ friend you have in the
world, (as you have had hundreds of opportunities of ascertaining;) if
my advice is to be spurned, and my motives suspected; if your first and
deliberate engagements to our firm are to be wantonly broken"----

"Ah, but, 'pon my soul, I was humbugged into making them," said
Titmouse, passionately.

"Why, you little miscreant!" exclaimed Gammon, starting up in his chair,
and gazing at him as if he would have scorched him with his eye, "Do you
DARE to say so? If you have no gratitude--have you lost your _memory_?
What were you when I dug you out of your filthy hole at Closet Court?
Did you not repeatedly go down on your knees to us? Did you not promise,
a thousand times, to do infinitely more than you are now called upon to
do? And is this, you insolent--despicable little insect!--is _this_ the
return you make us for putting you, a beggar--and very nearly too, an
idiot"----

"You're most uncommon polite," said Titmouse, suddenly and bitterly.

"Silence, sir! I am in no humor for trifling!" interrupted Gammon,
sternly. "I say, is _this_ the return you think of making us; not only
to insult us, but refuse to pay money actually advanced by us to save
you from starvation--money, and days and nights, and weeks and months,
and _many_ months of intense anxiety, expended in discovering how to put
you in possession of a splendid fortune?--Poh! you miserable little
trifler!--why should I trouble myself thus? Remember--remember,
Tittlebat Titmouse," continued Gammon, in a low tone, and extending
towards him threateningly his thin forefinger, "I who made you, will in
one day--one single day--unmake you--will blow you away like a bit of
froth; you shall never be seen, or heard of, or thought of, except by
some small draper whose unhappy shopman you may be!"

"Ah!--'pon my life! Dare say you think I'm uncommon frightened! Ah, ha!
Monstrous--particular good!" said Titmouse, desperately.

Gammon perceived that he trembled in every limb; and the smile which he
tried to throw into his face was so wretched, that, had you seen him at
that moment, and considered his position, much and justly as you now
despise him, you must have pitied him. "You're always now going on in
this way!--It's all so very likely!" continued he. "Why, 'pon my soul,
am not I to be A LORD one of these days? Can you help that? Can you send
a lord behind a draper's counter? 'Pon my soul, what do you say to that?
I like that, uncommon"----

"What do I say?" replied Gammon, calmly, "why, that I've a great mind to
say and do something that would make you--would dispose you to--jump
head foremost into the first sewer you came near!"

Titmouse's heart was lying fluttering at his throat.

"Tittlebat, Tittlebat!" continued Gammon, dropping his voice, and
speaking in a very kind and earnest manner, "if you did but know the
extent to which an accident has placed you in my power! at this moment
in my power! Really I almost tremble, myself, to think of it!" He rose,
brought his chamber-candlestick out of the hall--lit it--bade Titmouse
good-night, sadly but sternly--and shook him by the hand--"I may rid you
of my presence to-morrow morning, Mr. Titmouse. I shall leave you to
_try to enjoy Yatton_! May you find a _truer_--a more powerful friend
than you will have lost in me!" Titmouse never shrank more helplessly
under the eye of Mr. Gammon than he did at that moment.

"You--you--_won't_ stop and smoke another cigar with a poor devil, will
you, Mr. Gammon?" he inquired faintly. "It's somehow--most uncommon
lonely in this queer, large, old-fashioned"----

"No, sir," replied Gammon, peremptorily--and withdrew, leaving Titmouse
in a state of mingled alarm and anger--the former, however,
predominating.

"By jingo!" he at length exclaimed with a heavy sigh, after a revery of
about three minutes, gulping down the remainder of his brandy and water,
"If that same gent, Mr. Gammon, a'n't the--the--devil--he's the very
best imitation of him that ever I heard tell of!" Here he glanced
furtively round the room; then he got a little flustered; rang his bell
quickly for his valet, and, followed by him, retired to his
dressing-room.

The next morning the storm had entirely blown over. When they met at
breakfast, Titmouse, as Gammon had known would be the case, was all
submission and respect; in fact, it was evident that he was thoroughly
frightened by what had fallen from Gammon, but infinitely more so by the
_manner_ in which he had spoken over-night. Gammon, however, preserved
for some little time the haughty air with which he had met Titmouse; but
a few words of the latter, expressing deep regret for what he had said
through having drunk too much--poor little soul!--over-night, and his
unqualifyingly submitting to every one of the requisitions which had
been insisted on by Mr. Gammon--quickly dispersed the cloud settled on
that gentleman's brow, when he entered the breakfast-room.

"_Now_, my dear Mr. Titmouse," said he, very graciously, "you show
yourself the gentleman I always took you for--and I forget, forever,
all that passed between us, so unpleasantly, last night. I am sure it
will never be so again: for now we _entirely_ understand each other?"

"Oh yes--'pon my life--quite entirely!" replied Titmouse, meekly, with a
crestfallen air.

Soon after breakfast they adjourned, at Gammon's request, to the
billiard-room; where, though that gentleman knew how to handle a cue,
and Titmouse did not, he expressed great admiration for Titmouse's play,
and felt great interest in being shown by him how to get a ball, now and
then, into each pocket at one stroke, a masterly manœuvre in which
Titmouse succeeded two or three times, and Gammon not once, during their
hour's play. Upon that occasion had occurred the conversation in which
Titmouse made the suggestion we have already heard of, viz. that Gammon
should immediately clap the screw upon Aubrey, with a view to squeezing
out of him at least sufficient to pay the £10,000 bond, and their bill
of costs, immediately; and Titmouse urged Gammon at once to send Aubrey
packing after Yahoo to York Castle, as an inducement to an early
settlement of the remainder. Gammon, however, assured Mr. Titmouse, that
in all probability Mr. Aubrey had not a couple of thousand pounds in the
world.

"Well, that will do to begin with," said Titmouse, "and the rest _must_
come, sooner or later--eh, by Jove?"

"Leave him to me, my dear Titmouse, or rather to Mr. Quirk--who'll
_wring_ him before he's done with him, I warrant you! But, in the mean
while, if I work day and night, I will relieve you from this claim of
Mr. Quirk: for, in fact, I have little or no _real_ interest in the
matter."

"You'll take a slapping slice out of the bond, eh? Aha, Mr. Gammon!--But
what were you saying you'd do for me?"

"I repeat, that I am your only disinterested friend, Mr. Titmouse; I
shall never see a hundred pounds of what is going into Mr. Quirk's
hands; who, I must say, however," added Gammon, with sudden caution,
"has richly earned what he's going to get--but--to say the truth, by
following my directions throughout. I was saying, however, that I had
hit upon a scheme for ridding you of your difficulties. Though you have
only just stepped into your property, and consequently people are very
shy of advancing money on mortgage, if you'll only keep quiet, and leave
the affair entirely to me, I will undertake to get you a sum of possibly
twenty thousand pounds."

"My eyes!" exclaimed Titmouse, excitedly; quickly, however, adding with
a sad air--"but then, what a lot of it will go to old Quirk?"

"He _is_ rather a keen and hard--ahem! I own; but"----

"'Pon my life, couldn't we _do_ the old gent?"

"On no consideration, Mr. Titmouse; it would be a fatal step for
you--and indeed for me."

"What! and can _he_ do anything, too? I thought it was only you."--The
little fool had brought a glimpse of color into Gammon's cheek--but
Titmouse's volatility quickly relieved his tripping Prospero. "By the
way--'pon my life--sha'n't I have to pay it all back again! There's a
go! I hadn't thought of that."

"I shall first try to get it out of Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, "and then
out of another friend of yours. In the mean while we must not drop the
Tag-rags just yet." They then got into a long and confidential
conversation together; in the course of which, Titmouse happened to pop
out a little secret of his, which till then he had managed to keep from
Gammon, and which occasioned that gentleman a great and sudden inward
confusion--one which it was odd that so keen an observer as Titmouse
did not perceive indications of in the countenance of Gammon; viz.
his--Titmouse's--fervent and disinterested love for Miss Aubrey. While
he was rattling on with eager volubility upon this topic, Gammon, after
casting about a little in his mind, as to how he should deal with this
interesting discovery, resolved for the present to humor the notion, and
got out of Titmouse a full and particular account of his original
"_smite_," as that gentleman called his passion for Miss Aubrey--the
indelible impression she had made on his heart--the letter which he had
addressed to her--[here Gammon's vivid fancy portrayed to him the sort
of composition which must have reached Miss Aubrey, and he nearly burst
into a gentle fit of laughter]--and, with a strange candor, or rather,
to do him justice, with that frank simplicity which is characteristic of
noble natures--he at length described his unlucky encounter with Miss
Aubrey and her maid, in the winter; whereat Gammon felt a sort of sudden
inward spasm, which excited a certain twinging sensation in his right
toe--but it passed away--'twas after all, only a little juvenile
indiscretion of Titmouse's; but Gammon, with rather a serious air,
assured Titmouse that he had probably greatly endangered his prospect
with Miss Aubrey.

"Eh? Why, devil take it! a'n't I going to offer to her, though she's got
nothing?" interrupted Titmouse, with astonishment.

"True!--Ah, I had lost sight of that. Well, if you will pledge yourself
to address no more letters to her, nor take any steps to see her,
without first communicating with me--I think I can promise--hem!" he
looked archly at Titmouse.

"She's a most _uncommon_ lovely gal"--he simpered sheepishly. The fact
was that Gammon had conceived quite another scheme for Titmouse--wholly
inconsistent with his pure, ardent, and enlightened attachment to Miss
Aubrey; 'twas undoubtedly rather a bold and ambitious one, but Gammon
did not despair; for he had that confidence in himself, and in his
knowledge of human nature, which always supported him in the most
arduous and apparently hopeless undertakings.

There was a visible alteration for the better in the state of things at
Yatton, as soon as Messrs. Yahoo and Fitz-Snooks had been disposed of.
Now and then a few of the distinguished people who had honored Mr.
Titmouse by going out in procession to meet and welcome him, were
invited to spend a day at Yatton; and generally quitted full of
admiration of the dinner and wines, the unaffected good-nature and
simplicity of their hospitable host, and the bland, composed, and
intellectual deportment and conversation of Mr. Gammon. When rent-day
arrived, Mr. Titmouse, attended by Mr. Gammon, made his appearance in
the steward's room, and also in the hall; where, according to former
custom, good substantial fare was set out for the tenants. They received
him with a due respect of manner; but--alas--where was the cheerfulness,
the cordiality, the rough, honest heartiness of days gone by, on such
occasions? Few of the tenants stayed to partake of the good things
prepared for them; a circumstance which greatly affected Mr. Griffiths,
and piqued Mr. Gammon; as for Titmouse, however, he said, with a laugh,
"Curse 'em! let 'em leave it alone, if they a'n't hungry!" and any faint
feeling of mortification which he might have experienced, was dissipated
by the intelligence of the amount paid into his banker's. Gammon was
sensible that the scenes which had been exhibited at Yatton on the first
night of his protégé's arrival, had seriously injured him in the
neighborhood and county, and was bent upon effacing, as quickly as
possible, such unfavorable impressions, by prevailing on Titmouse to
"purge and live cleanly"--at all events for the present.

Let me pause now, for a moment, to inquire, ought not this favored young
man to have felt happy? Here he was, master of a fine estate, producing
him a splendid unencumbered rent-roll; a delightful residence,
suggesting innumerable dear and dignified associations connected with
old English feeling; a luxurious table, with the choicest liqueurs and
wines, in abundance: he might smoke the finest cigars that the world
could produce, from morning to night, if so disposed; had unlimited
facilities for securing a distinguished personal appearance, as far as
dress and decoration went; had all the amusements of the county at his
command; troops of servants, eager and obsequious in their attentions;
horses and carriages of every description which he might have chosen to
order out--had, in short, all the "appliances and means to boot," which
could be desired or imagined by a gentleman of his station and
affluence. Mr. Gammon was, though somewhat stern and plain-spoken, still
a most sincere and powerful friend, deeply and disinterestedly
solicitous about his interests, and protecting him from villanous and
designing adventurers; then he had in prospect the brilliant mazes of
fashionable life in town--oh, in the name of everything that this world
can produce, and of the feelings it should excite, ought not Titmouse to
have enjoyed life--to have been happy? Yet he was not; he felt, quite
independently of any constraint occasioned by the presence of Mr.
Gammon, full of deplorable and inexpressible wearisomeness, which
nothing could alleviate, but the constant use of cigars, and brandy and
water. On the first Sunday after the departure of Fitz-Snooks, Titmouse
was prevailed upon to accompany the devout and exemplary Gammon to
church; where, barring a good many ill-concealed yawns and constant
fidgetiness, he conducted himself with tolerable decorum. Yet still the
style of his dress, his air, and his countenance, filled the little
congregation with feelings of great astonishment, when they thought that
_that_ was the new Squire of Yatton, and for a moment contrasted him
with his simple and dignified predecessor, Mr. Aubrey. As for the worthy
vicar, Dr. Tatham, Gammon resolved to secure his good graces, and
succeeded. He called upon the worthy vicar soon after having heard from
Titmouse, of his, Yahoo's, and Fitz-Snooks' encounter with Dr. Tatham;
and expressed profound concern on being apprised of the rude
treatment which he had encountered. There was a gentleness and
affability--tempering at once and enhancing his evident acuteness and
knowledge of the world--which quite captivated the little doctor. But,
above all, the expressions of delicate sympathy and regret with which he
now and then alluded to the late occupants of Yatton, and towards whom
the stern requisitions of professional duty had caused him to play so
odious a part, and his minute inquiries about them, drew out almost all
that was in the little doctor's heart concerning his departed friends.
Gammon gazed with deep interest at the old blind stag-hound, and feeble
old Peggy; and seemed never tired of hearing the doctor's little
anecdotes concerning them. He introduced Titmouse to the vicar; and, in
his presence, Gammon declared his (Titmouse's) hatred and contempt for
the two fellows who were with him when first he saw Dr. Tatham; who
thereupon banished from his heart all recollection of the conduct which
had so deeply hurt his feelings. Gammon, on another occasion, infinitely
delighted the doctor by calling on a Monday morning, and alluding with
evident interest and anxiety to certain passages in his sermon of the
day before, and which led to a very lengthened and interesting
discussion. In consequence of what then transpired, the doctor suddenly
bethought himself of routing out an old sermon, which he had once
preached before the judges of assize:--and during the week he touched it
up with a good deal of care for the ensuing Sunday--when he had the
satisfaction of observing the marked and undeviating attention with
which Mr. Gammon sat listening to him; and that candid inquirer after
truth afterwards stepped into the little vestry and warmly complimented
the doctor upon his very satisfactory and masterly discourse. Thus it
was that Dr. Tatham came to pen a postscript to one of his letters to
Mrs. Aubrey, to which I have formerly alluded, and of which said
postscript the following is a copy:----

     "P. S. By the way, the altered state of things at the Hall, I am of
     opinion, is entirely owing to the presence and the influence of a
     Mr. Gammon--one of the chief of Mr. Titmouse's solicitors, and to
     whom he seems very firmly attached. I have lived too long in the
     world to form hasty opinions, and am not apt to be deceived in my
     estimate of mankind; but I must say, I consider Mr. Gammon to be a
     very superior man, as well in character and intellect, as in
     acquirements. He possesses great acuteness and knowledge of the
     world, general information, a very calm and courteous address--and
     above and beyond all, is a man of very enlightened religious
     feeling. He comes constantly to church, and presents a truly
     edifying example to all around, of decorum and attention. You would
     be delighted to hear the discussions we have had on points which my
     sermons have suggested to him. He is really an uncommonly acute
     man, and I assure you it requires some little logical skill to
     contend with him in argument. I preached a sermon lately, specially
     aimed at him, which, thank God! I have every reason to believe has
     been attended with happy effects, and allayed some startling doubts
     which had been for years tormenting him. I am sure that my dear
     friend" (_i. e._ Mr. Aubrey) "would be delighted with him. I had
     myself, I assure you, to overcome a very strong prejudice against
     him--a thing I always love to attempt, and have in a measure, in
     the present instance, succeeded. He speaks of you all frequently,
     with evident caution, but at the same time with the deepest respect
     and sympathy."

This postscript it was, which, as I have already intimated, suggested to
Mr. Aubrey to seek the interview with Gammon which has been described,
and during which it was frequently present to his mind.

While, however, under the pressure of Mr. Gammon's benumbing presence
and authority, Titmouse was for a brief while leading this sober retired
life at Yatton--why, he hardly knew, except that Gammon willed it--a
circumstance occurred which suddenly placed him on the very highest
pinnacle of popularity in metropolitan society. I hardly know how to
suppress my feelings of exultation, in retracing the rapid steps by
which Mr. Titmouse was transformed into a LION of the first magnitude.
Be it known that there was a MR. BLADDERY PIP, a fashionable novelist,
possessed of most extraordinary versatility and power; for he had at the
end of every nine months, during the last nine years, produced a novel
in three volumes--each succeeding one eclipsing the splendor of its
predecessor, (in the judgment of the accomplished and disinterested
newspaper critics)--in the "masterly structure of the plot"--the "vivid
and varied delineation of character"--the "profound acquaintance with
the workings of the human heart"--"exquisite appreciation of life in all
its endless varieties"--"piercing but delicate satire"--"bold and
powerful denunciations of popular vices"--"rich and tender domestic
scenes"--"inimitable ease and grace"--"consummate tact and
judgment"--"reflection coextensive with observation"--"the style
flowing, brilliant, nervous, varied, picturesque," _et cetera_, _et
cetera_, _et cetera_. We have, in the present day, thank Heaven! at
least two or three hundred such writers; but at the time about which I
am speaking, Mr. Bladdery Pip was pretty nearly alone in his glory.
Such was the man, to whose trading brain it suddenly occurred, on
glancing over the newspaper report of the trial of _Doe on the Demise of
Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_, to make the interesting facts of the case the
basis of a new novel, on quite a new plan, and which was infinitely to
transcend all his former works, and, in fact, occasion quite a
revolution in that brilliant and instructive species of literature! To
work went Mr. Pip, within a day or two after the trial was over, and in
an incredibly short space of time had got to the close of his labors.
Practice had made him perfect, and given him infinite facility in the
production of first-rate writing. The spirited publisher (Mr. Bubble)
then quickly set to work to "get the steam up"--but ah! how secretly and
skilfully! For some time there appeared numerous intimations in the
daily papers, that "the circles of ton" were "on the _qui vive_" in
expectation of a certain forthcoming work, &c. &c. &c.--that
"disclosures of a very extraordinary character" were being looked
for--"attempts had been made to suppress," &c. &c.--"compromising
certain distinguished," &c., and so forth; all these paragraphs being in
the unquestionable [!] _editorial_ style, and _genuine_ [!] indications
of a mysterious under-current of curiosity and excitement, existing in
those regions which were watched with reverential awe and constancy by
the occupants of the lower regions. As time advanced, more frequent
became these titillations of the public palate--more distinct these
intimations of what was going forward, and might be shortly expected,
from the appearance of the long-promised work. Take for instance the
following, which ran the round of every newspaper, and wrought up to a
high pitch the curiosity of three-fourths of the fools in the country:--

     "The efforts made to deprive the public of the interesting and
     peculiar scenes contained in the forthcoming novel, and--in
     short--to suppress it, have entirely failed, owing to the
     resolution of the gifted author, and the determination of the
     spirited publisher; and their only effect has been to accelerate
     the appearance of the work. It will bear the exciting and _piquant_
     title--'TIPPETIWINK;' and is said to be founded on the remarkable
     circumstances attending the recent trial of a great ejectment cause
     at York. More than one noble family's history is believed to be
     involved in some of the details which will be found in the
     forthcoming publication, for which, we are assured, there are
     already symptoms of an unprecedented demand. The 'favored few' who
     have seen it, predict that it will produce a prodigious sensation.
     The _happy audacity_ with which facts are adhered to, will, we
     trust, not lead to the disagreeable consequences that appear to be
     looked for, in certain quarters, with no little anxiety and dismay.
     When we announce that its author is the gifted writer of 'THE
     SILVER SPOONS'--'SPINNACH'--'THE
     PIROUETTE'--'TITTLE-TATTLE'--'FITZ-GIBLETS'--'SQUINT,' &c. &c. &c.,
     we trust we are violating no literary confidence."

There was no resisting this sort of thing. In that day, a skilfully
directed play of puffs laid prostrate the whole of the sagacious
fashionable world; _producing_ the excitement of which they affected to
chronicle the existence. The artilleryman, in the present instance, was,
in fact, a hack writer, hired by Mr. Bubble--in fact, kept by him
entirely--to perform services of this degrading description--and he sat
from morning to night in a back-room on Mr. Bubble's premises, engaged
in spinning out these villanous and lying paragraphs concerning every
work published, or about to be published, by Mr. Bubble. Then that
gentleman hit upon another admirable device. He had seven hundred copies
printed off; and allowing a hundred for a _first_ edition, he varied the
title-pages of each of the remaining six hundred by the words: "_Second_
Edition"--"_Third_ Edition"--"_Fourth_ Edition"--"_Fifth_
Edition"--"_Sixth_ Edition"--and "_Seventh_ Edition."

By the time, however, that the fourth edition had been announced, there
existed a real rage for the book. The circulating libraries at the West
End of the town were besieged by applicants for a perusal of the work;
and "notices," "reviews," and "extracts," began to make their appearance
with increasing frequency in the newspapers. The idea of the work was
admirable. _Tippetiwink_, the hero, was a young gentleman of ancient
family--an only child--kidnapped away in his infancy by the malignant
agency of "the demon _Mowbray_," a distant relative, of a fierce temper
and wicked character, who by these means had succeeded to the enjoyment
of the estate, and would have come, in time, to the honors and domains
of the most ancient and noble family in the kingdom, that of the _Earl
of Frizzleton_. Poor Tippetiwink was at length, however, discovered by
his illustrious kinsman, by mere accident, in an obscure capacity, in
the employ of a benevolent linen-draper, _Black-bag_, who was described
as one of the most amiable and generous of linen-drapers; and, after a
series of wonderful adventures, in which the hero displayed the most
heroic constancy, the earl succeeded in reinstating his oppressed and
injured kinsman in the lofty station which he ought always to have
occupied. His daughter--a paragon of female loveliness--the _Lady
Sapphira Sigh-away_--evinced the deepest interest in the success of
_Tippetiwink_; and at length--the happy result may be guessed by the
astute and experienced novel-reader. Out of these few and natural
incidents, Mr. Bladdery Pip was pronounced at length, by those (_i. e._
the aforesaid newspaper scribes) who govern, if they do not indeed
constitute, PUBLIC OPINION, to have produced an imperishable record of
his genius; avoiding all the faults, and combining all the excellences,
of all his former productions. The identity between Titmouse and
_Tippetiwink_, Lord Dreddlington and _Lord Frizzleton_, Lady Cecilia and
_Lady Sapphira_, and Mr. Aubrey and the "_demon Mowbray_," was quickly
established. The novel passed speedily into the _tenth edition_! An
undoubted, and a very great sensation was produced; extracts descriptive
of the persons, particularly that of Titmouse, and the earl, and Lady
Cecilia, figuring in the story, were given in the London papers, and
thence transferred into those all over the country. The very author of
the book, Mr. Bladdery Pip, became a prodigious LION, and dressing
himself in the most elaborate and exquisite style, had his portrait,
looking most intensely intellectual, prefixed to the tenth edition. Then
came portraits of "Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq.," (for which he had never
sat,) giving him large melting eyes, a very pensive face, and a most
fashionable appearance. The Earl of Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia became
also a lion and lioness. Hundreds of opera-glasses were directed, at
once, to their opera-box; innumerable were the anxious salutations they
received as they drove round the Park--and round it they went three or
four times as often as they had ever done before. 'Twas whispered that
the king had read the book, and drank the earl's health, under the name
of Lord Frizzleton--while the queen did the same for Lady Cecilia as
Lady Sapphira. Their appearance produced a manifest sensation at both
the levee and drawing-room.--Majesty looked blander than usual as they
approached. Poor Lord Dreddlington, and Lady Cecilia, mounted in a trice
into the seventh heaven of rapturous excitement; for there was that
buoyant quality about their heads which secured them a graceful and
rapid upward motion. They were both unutterably _happy_; living in a
gentle delicious tumult of exalted feeling. Irrepressible exultation
glistened in the earl's eyes; he threw an infinite deal of blandness and
courtesy into his manners wherever he was, and whomsoever he addressed;
as if he could now easily afford it, confident in the inaccessible
sublimity of his position. It was slightly laughable to observe,
however, the desperate efforts he made to maintain his former frigid
composure of manner--but in vain; his nervousness looked almost like a
sudden, though gentle accession of St. Vitus's dance. Innumerable were
the inquiries after Titmouse--his person--his manners--his
character--his dress, made of Lady Cecilia by her friends. Young ladies
tormented her for his autograph. 'T was with her as if the level surface
of the Dead Sea had been stirred by the freshening breeze.

When a thing of this sort is once fairly set going, where is it to end?
When fashion does go mad, her madness is wonderful; and she very soon
turns the world mad. Presently the young men appeared everywhere in
black satin stocks, embroidered, some with flowers, and others with
gold, and which went by the name of "_Titmouse-Ties_;" and in hats, with
high crowns and rims a quarter of an inch in depth, called
"_Tittlebats_." All the young blades about town, especially the clerks
and shopmen in the city, dressed themselves in the most extravagant
style; an amazing impetus was given to the cigar trade--whose shops were
crowded, especially at nights; and every puppy that walked the streets
puffed cigar-smoke in your eyes. In short, pert and lively _Titmice_
might be seen hopping about the streets in all directions. As for
Tag-rag, wonders befell him. A paragraph in a paper pointed him out as
the original of _Black-bag_, and his shop in Oxford Street as the scene
of Titmouse's service. Thither quickly poured the tide of fashionable
curiosity, and custom. His business was soon trebled. He wore his best
clothes every day, and smirked and smiled, and bustled about amid the
crowd in his shop, in a perfect fever of excitement. He began to think
of buying the adjoining premises, and adding them to his own; and set
his name down as a subscriber of a guinea a-year to the "Decayed
Drapers' Association." Those were glorious times for Mr. Tag-rag. He was
forced to engage a dozen extra hands; there were seldom less than fifty
or a hundred persons in his shop at once; strings of carriages stood
before his door, sometimes two deep, and continual strugglings occurred
between the coachmen for precedence. In fact, Mr. Tag-rag believed that
the MILLENNIUM (about which he had often heard wonders from Mr. Dismal
Horror, who, it seemed, knew all about it--a fact of which he had first
persuaded his congregation, _and then himself_) was coming in earnest.




CHAPTER IX.


The undulations of the popular excitement in town, were not long in
reaching the calm retreat of Mr. Titmouse in Yorkshire. To say nothing
of his having on several occasions observed artists busily engaged in
sketching different views of the Hall and its surrounding scenery, and,
on inquiry, discovered that they had been sent from London for the
express purpose of presenting to the excited public sketches of the
"residence of Mr. Titmouse," a copy of the inimitable performance of Mr.
Bladdery Pip--viz. "TIPPETIWINK," (tenth edition) was sent down to Mr.
Titmouse by Gammon; who also forwarded to him, from time to time,
newspapers containing those paragraphs which identified Titmouse with
the hero of the novel, and also testified the profound impression which
it was making upon the thinking classes of the community. Was Titmouse's
wish to witness the ferment he had so unconsciously produced in the
metropolis, unreasonable? Yatton was beginning to look duller daily,
even before the arrival of this stimulating intelligence from town;
Titmouse feeling quite out of his element. So--Gammon _non
contradicente_--up came Titmouse to town. If he had not been naturally a
fool, the notice he attracted in London must soon have made him one. He
had been for coming up in a post-chaise and four; but Gammon, in a
letter, succeeded in dissuading him from incurring so useless an
expense, assuring him that men of even as high consideration as himself,
constantly availed themselves of the safe and rapid transit afforded by
the royal mail. His valet, on being appealed to, corroborated Mr.
Gammon's representations; adding, that the late hour in the evening at
which that respectable vehicle arrived in town would effectually shroud
him from public observation. Giving strict and repeated orders to his
valet to deposit him at once "in a first-rate West-End hotel," the
haughty lord of Yatton, plentifully provided with cigars, stepped into
the mail, his valet perching himself upon the box-seat. That gifted
functionary was well acquainted with town, and resolved on his master's
taking up his quarters at the Harcourt Hotel, in the immediate vicinity
of Bond Street.

The mail passed the Peacock, at Islington, about half-past eight
o'clock; and long before they had reached even that point, the eager and
anxious eye of Titmouse had been on the look-out for indications of his
celebrity. He was, however, compelled to own that both people and places
seemed much as usual--wearing no particular air of excitement. At this
he was a little chagrined, till he reflected on the vulgar ignorance of
the movements of the great, for which the eastern regions of the
metropolis were proverbial, and also on the increasing duskiness of the
evening, the rapid pace at which the mail rattled along, and the
circumstance of his being concealed inside. When his humble
hackney-coach (its driver a feeble old man, with a wisp of straw for a
hat-band, and sitting on the rickety box like a heap of dirty old
clothes, and the flagging and limping horses looking truly miserable
objects) had rumbled slowly up to the lofty and gloomy door of the
Harcourt Hotel, it seemed to excite no notice whatever. A tall waiter,
in a plain suit of black evening dress, with his hands stuck behind his
coat-tails, continued standing in the ample doorway, eying the plebeian
vehicle which had drawn up, with utter indifference--conjecturing,
probably, that it had come to the wrong door. With the same air of
provoking superciliousness he stood till the valet, having jumped down
from his seat beside the driver, ran up, and in a peremptory sort of way
exclaimed, "MR. TITMOUSE of Yatton!" This stirred the waiter into
something like energy.

"Here, sir!" called out Mr. Titmouse from within the coach; and on the
waiter's slowly approaching, the former inquired of him in a
sufficiently swaggering manner--"Pray, has the _Earl of Dreddlington_
been inquiring for me here to-day?" The words seemed to operate like
magic; converting the person addressed, in a moment, into a
slave--supple and obsequious.

"His Lordship has not been here to-day, sir," he replied in a low tone,
with a most courteous inclination, gently opening the door, and
noiselessly letting down the steps. "Do you alight, sir?"

"Why--a--have you room for me, and my _fellow_ there?"

"Oh yes, sir! certainly.--Shall I show you into the coffee-room, sir?"

"The coffee-room? Curse the coffee-room, sir! Demme, sir, do you suppose
I'm a commercial traveller? Show me into a private room, sir!" The
waiter bowed low; and in silent surprise led Mr. Titmouse to a very
spacious and elegantly-furnished apartment--where, amid the blaze of six
wax candles, and attended by three waiters, he supped, an hour or two
afterwards, in great state--retiring about eleven o'clock to his
apartment, overcome with fatigue--and brandy and water: having
fortunately escaped the indignity of being forced to sit in the room
where an English nobleman, two or three county members, and a couple of
foreign princes, were sitting sipping their claret, some writing
letters, and others conning over the evening papers. About noon, the
next day, he called upon the Earl of Dreddlington; and though, under
ordinary circumstances, his Lordship would have considered the visit
rather unseasonable, he nevertheless received his fortunate and now
truly distinguished kinsman with the most urbane cordiality. At the
earl's suggestion, and with Mr. Gammon's concurrence, Titmouse, within
about a week after his arrival in town, took a set of chambers in the
Albany, together with the elegant furniture which had belonged to their
late tenant, a distinguished fashionable, who had shortly before
suddenly gone abroad upon a mission of great importance--_to himself_:
viz. to avoid his creditors. Mr. Titmouse soon began to feel, in various
ways, the distinction which was attached to his name--commencing, as he
did at once, the gay and brilliant life of a man of high fashion, and
under the august auspices of the Earl of Dreddlington. Like as a cat,
shod with walnut-shells by some merry young scapegrace, doubtless feels
more and more astounded at the clatter it makes in scampering up and
down the bare echoing floors and staircases; so, in some sort, was it
with Titmouse, in respect of the sudden and amazing _éclat_ with which
all his appearances and movements were attended in the regions of
fashion. 'Tis a matter of indifference to a fool, whether you laugh
_with_ him or _at_ him; so as that you do but laugh--an observation
which will account for much of the conduct both of Lord Dreddlington and
Titmouse. In this short life, and dull world, the thing is--to create a
_sensation_, never mind how; and every opportunity of doing so should be
gratefully seized hold of, and improved to the uttermost, by those who
have nothing else to do, and have an inclination to distinguish
themselves from the common herd of mankind, and show that they have not
lived in vain. Lord Dreddlington had got so inflated by the attention he
excited, that he set down everything he witnessed to the score of
deference and admiration. His self-conceit was so intense, that it
consumed every vestige of sense he had about him. He stood in solitary
grandeur upon the lofty pillar of his pride, inaccessible to ridicule,
and insensible indeed of its approach, like _vanity_ "on a monument
smiling at" _scorn_. Indeed,

    "His soul was like a star, and dwelt apart."

He did not conceive it possible for any one to laugh at _him_, or
anything he might choose to do, or any one he might think fit to
associate with and introduce to the notice of society--which kind office
he forthwith performed for Titmouse, to whose odd person, and somewhat
eccentric dress and demeanor, his Lordship (who imagined that the same
operation was going on in the minds of other people) was growing daily
more reconciled. Thus, that which had at first so shocked his Lordship,
he got at length perfectly familiar and satisfied with, and began to
suspect whether it had not been assumed by Titmouse, out of a daring
scorn for the intrusive opinions of the world, which showed a loftiness
of spirit akin to his Lordship's own. Besides, in another point of
view--suppose the manner and appearance of Titmouse were ever so absurd,
so long as his Lordship chose to tolerate them, who should venture to
gainsay them? So the earl asked him frequently to dinner; took him with
them when his Lordship and Lady Cecilia went out in the evenings; gave
him a seat in his carriage in going down to the House; and invited him
to accompany him and Lady Cecilia when they either drove or rode round
the Park. As for the matter of riding, Titmouse's assiduous attention at
the riding-school, enabled him to appear on horseback without being
_glaringly_ unequal to the management of his horse, which, however, he
more than once induced to back somewhat threateningly upon those of Lady
Cecilia and the earl. Titmouse happening to let fall, at the earl's
table, that he had that day ordered an elegant chariot to be built for
him, his Lordship intimated that a cab was the usual turn-out of a
bachelor man of fashion; whereupon Titmouse the next day countermanded
his order, and was fortunate enough to secure a cab which had just been
completed for a young nobleman who was unable to pay for it, and whom,
consequently, the builder did not care about disappointing. He soon
provided himself with a great horse and a little tiger. What pen can do
justice to the feelings with which he first sat down in that cab,
yielding upon its thoroughly well-balanced springs, took the reins from
his little tiger, and then heard him jump up behind! As it was a trifle
too early for the Park, he suddenly bethought himself of exhibiting his
splendors before the establishment of Mr. Tag-rag; so he desired his
little imp behind to run and summon his valet, who in a trice came down;
and in answer to a question, "whether there wasn't something wanting
from a draper or hosier," was informed glibly, that six dozen of best
cambric pocket handkerchiefs, a dozen or two pair of white kid gloves,
half-a-dozen stocks, and various other items were "wanting"--(_i. e._ by
the valet himself, for Titmouse was already profusely provided with
these articles.) Off, however, he drove--occupied with but one idea--and
succeeded, at length, in reaching the Oxford Street establishment,
before the door of which five or six carriages were standing. I should
say that, at the moment of Mr. Titmouse's strutting into that scene of
his former miserable servitude, he experienced a gush of delight
sufficient to have effaced all recollection of the wretchedness,
privation, and oppression, endured in his early days. There was
presently an evident flutter among the gentlemen engaged behind the
counter--for, thought they--it must be "the great Mr. Titmouse!" Mr.
Tag-rag, catching sight of him, bounced out of his little room, and
bustled up to him through the crowd of customers, bowing, scraping,
blushing, and rubbing his hands, full of pleasurable excitement, and
exhibiting the most profound obsequiousness. "Hope you're well, sir," he
commenced in a low tone, but instantly added, in a louder voice,
observing that Mr. Titmouse chose to appear to have come merely upon
business, "what can I have the honor to do for you, sir, this morning?"
And handing him a stool, Tag-rag, with a respectful air, received a very
liberal order from Mr. Titmouse, and called for a shopman to make a
minute of the precious words which fell from the lips of Mr. Titmouse.

"Dear me, sir, is that your cab?" said Tag-rag, as, having accompanied
Titmouse, bowing at every step, to the door, they both stood there for a
moment, "I never saw such a beautiful turn-out in my life, sir"----

"Ya--a--s. Pretty well--pretty well; but that young rascal of mine's
dirtied one of his boots a little--dem him!" and he looked terrors at
the tiger.

"Oh dear!--so he has; shall I wipe it off, sir? _Do_ let one of my young
men"----

"No, it don't signify much. By the way, Mr. Tag-rag," added Mr.
Titmouse, in a drawling way, "all well at--at--demme if I've not, at
this moment, forgot the name of your place in the country"----

"Satin Lodge, sir," said Tag-rag, meekly, but with infinite inward
uneasiness.

"Oh--ay, to be sure. One sees, 'pon my soul, such a lot of
places--but--eh?--all well?"

"All very well, indeed, sir; and constantly talking of you, sir,"
replied Tag-rag, with an earnestness amounting to intensity.

"Ah--well! My compliments--" here he drew on his second glove, and moved
towards his cab, Tag-rag accompanying him--"glad they're well. If ever
I'm driving that way--good-day!" In popped Titmouse--up jumped his tiger
behind--crack went his whip--and away darted the horse and splendid
vehicle--Tag-rag following it with an admiring and anxious eye.

As Mr. Titmouse sat in his cab, on his way to the Park, dressed in the
extreme of the mode; his glossy hat perched sideways on his bushy,
well-oiled, but somewhat mottled hair; his surtout lined with velvet;
his full satin stock, spangled with inwrought gold flowers, and
ornamented with two splendid pins, connected together with delicate
double gold chains; his shirt-collar turned down over his stock; his
chased gold eyeglass stuck in his right eye; the stiff wristbands of his
shirt turned back over his coat-cuffs; and his red hands concealed in
snowy kid gloves, holding his whip and reins with graceful ease: when he
considered the exquisite figure he must thus present to the eye of all
beholders, and gave them credit for gazing at him with the same sort of
feelings which similar sights had, but a few months before, excited in
_his_ despairing breast, his little cup of happiness was full, and even
brimming over. This, though I doubt whether it was a just reflection,
was still a very natural one; for he knew what his own feelings were,
though not how weak and absurd they were; and of course judged of others
by himself. If the Marquis of Whigborough, with his £200,000 a-year, and
5,000 independent voters at his command, had been on his way down to the
House, absorbed with anxiety as to the effect of the final threat he was
going to make to the Minister, that, unless he had a few strawberry
leaves promised him, he should feel it his duty to record his vote
against the great BILL for "_Giving Everybody Everything_," which stood
for a third reading that evening; or the great Duke of ----, a glance of
whose eye, or a wave of whose hand, was sufficient to have lit up an
European war, and who might at that moment have been balancing in his
mind the fate of millions of mankind, as depending upon his _fiat_ for
peace or war:--I say, that if both, or either of these personages, had
passed or met Mr. Titmouse, in their cabs, (which they were mechanically
urging onward, so absorbed the while with their own thoughts, that they
scarce knew whether they were in a cab or a handbarrow, in which latter,
had it been before their gates, either of them might, in his
abstraction, have seated himself;) Titmouse's superior acquaintance with
human nature assured him, that the sight of his tip-top turn-out, could
not fail of attracting their attention, and nettling their pride.
Whether Milton, if cast on a desolate island, but with the means of
writing _Paradise Lost_, would have done so, had he been certain that no
human eye would ever peruse a line of it; or whether Mr. Titmouse, had
he been suddenly deposited in his splendid cab, in the midst of the
desert of Sahara, with not one of his species to fix an envying eye upon
him, would nevertheless have experienced a great measure of
satisfaction, I am not prepared to say. As, however, every condition of
life has its mixture of good and evil, so, if Titmouse had been placed
in the midst of the aforesaid desert at the time when he was last before
the reader, instead of dashing along Oxford Street, he would have
escaped certain difficulties and dangers which he presently encountered.
Had an ape, not acquainted with the science of driving, been put into
Titmouse's place, he would probably have driven much in the same style,
though he would have had greatly the advantage over his rival in respect
of his simple and natural appearance; being, to the eye of correct
taste, "when unadorned, adorned the most." Mr. Titmouse, in spite of the
assistance to his sight which he derived from his _neutral_[21] glass,
was continually coming into collision with the vehicles which met and
passed him, on his way to Cumberland Gate. He got into no fewer than
four distinct _rows_ (to say nothing of the flying curses which he
received in passing) between the point which I have named, and Mr.
Tag-rag's premises. But as he was by no means destitute of spirit, he
sat in his cab, on these four occasions, cursing and blaspheming like a
little fiend; till he almost brought tears of vexation into the eyes of
one or two of his opponents, (cads, cab-drivers, watermen,
hackney-coachmen, carters, stage-coachmen, market-gardeners, and
draymen,) who unexpectedly found their own weapon--_i. e.
slang_--wielded with such superior power and effect, for once in a way,
by a swell--an aristocrat. The more manly of his opponents were filled
with secret respect for the possessor of such unsuspected powers. Still
it was unpleasant for a person of Mr. Titmouse's distinction to be
engaged in these conflicts; and he would have given the world to have
conquered his conceit so far as to summon his little tiger within, and
surrender to him the reins. Such a ridiculous confession of his own
incapacity, however, he could not think of, and he got into several
little disturbances in the Park; after which he drove home: the battered
cab had to be taken to the maker's, where the injuries it had sustained
were repaired, however, for the trifling sum of forty pounds.

The position obtained for Titmouse by the masterly genius of Mr.
Bladdery Pip, was secured and strengthened by much more substantial
claims upon the respect of society than those derived from literary
genius. Rumor is a dame always looking at objects through very strong
magnifying-glasses; and who, guided by what she saw, soon gave out that
Titmouse was patron of three boroughs; had a clear rent-roll of thirty
thousand a-year; and had already received nearly a hundred thousand
pounds in hard cash from the previous proprietor of his estates, as a
compensation for the back rents, which that usurper had been for so many
years in the receipt of. Then he was--in truth and fact--very near in
succession to the ancient and distinguished Barony of Drelincourt, and
the extensive estates thereto annexed. He was young; by no means
ill-looking; and was--unmarried. Under the mask of _naïveté_ and
eccentricity, it was believed that he concealed great natural acuteness,
for the purpose of ascertaining who were his real and who only his
pretended friends and well-wishers, and that his noble relatives had
given in to his little scheme, for the purpose of aiding him in the
important discovery upon which he was bent. Infinite effect was thus
given to the earl's introductions. Wherever Titmouse went, he found new
and delightful acquaintances; and invitations to dinners, balls, routs,
soirées, came showering daily into his rooms at the Albany, where also
were left innumerable cards, bearing names of very high fashion. All who
had daughters or sisters in the market, paid eager and persevering court
to Mr. Titmouse, and still more so to the Earl of Dreddlington and Lady
Cecilia, his august _sponsors_; so that--such being the will of that
merry jade Fortune--they who had once regarded him as an object only of
shuddering disgust and ineffable contempt, and had been disposed to
order their servants to show him out again into the streets, were now,
in a manner, _magnified and made honorable_ by means of their connection
with him; or rather, society, through his means, had become suddenly
sensible of the commanding qualities and pretensions of the Earl of
Dreddlington and the Lady Cecilia. In the ball-room--at Almack's
even--how many young men, handsome, accomplished, and of the highest
personal consequence and rank, applied in vain for the hand of haughty
beauty, which Mr. Titmouse had only to ask for, and obtain! Whose was
the opera-box into which he might not drop as a welcome visitor, and be
seen lounging in envied familiarity with its fair and brilliant inmates?
Were there not mothers of high fashion, of stately pride, of sounding
rank, who would have humbled themselves before Titmouse, if thereby he
could have been brought a suitor to the feet of one of their delicate
and beautiful daughters? But it was not over the fair sex alone that the
magic of Mr. Titmouse's name and pretensions had obtained this great and
sudden ascendency; he excited no small attention among men of
fashion--great numbers of whom quickly recognized in him one very fit to
become their butt and their dupe. What signified it to men secure of
their own position in society, that they were seen openly associating
with one so outrageously absurd in his dress--and vulgar and ignorant
beyond all example? So long as he bled freely, and "_trotted out_,"
briskly and willingly, his eccentricities could be not merely tolerated,
but humored. Take, for instance, the gay and popular MARQUIS
GANTS-JAUNES DE MILLEFLEURS; but he is worth a word or two of
description, because of the position he had contrived to acquire and
retain, and the influence which he managed to exercise over a
considerable portion of London society. The post he was anxious to
secure was that of the leader of _ton_; and he wished it to appear that
that was the sole object of his ambition. While, however, he affected to
be entirely engrossed by such matters as devising new and exquisite
variations of dress, equipage, and cookery, he was, in reality, bent
upon graver pursuits--upon gratifying his own licentious tastes and
inclinations, with secrecy and impunity. He really despised _folly_,
cultivating and practising only _vice_; in which he was, in a manner, an
epicure. He was now about his forty-second year; had been handsome; was
of bland and fascinating address; variously accomplished; of exquisite
tact; of most refined taste. There was, however, a slight fulness and
puffiness about his features--an expression in his eye which spoke of
_satiety_--and spoke truly. He was a very proud, selfish, heartless
person; but these qualities he contrived to disguise from many of even
his most intimate associates. An object of constant anxiety to him, was
to ingratiate himself with the younger and weaker branches of the
aristocracy, in order to secure a distinguished _status_ in society, and
he succeeded. To gain this point, he taxed all his resources; never were
so exquisitely blended, as in his instance, with a view to securing his
_influence_, the qualities of dictator and parasite: he always appeared
the _agreeable equal_ of those whom, for his life, he dared not
seriously have offended. He had no fortune; no visible means of making
money--did not sensibly sponge upon his friends, nor fall into
conspicuous embarrassments; yet he always lived in luxury.--Without
money, he in some inconceivable manner always contrived to be in the
possession of money's worth. He had a magical power of soothing
querulous tradesmen. He had a knack of always keeping himself, his
_clique_, his sayings and doings, before the eye of the public, in such
a manner as to satisfy it that he was the acknowledged leader of
fashion. Yet was it in truth no such thing--but only a _false_ fashion;
there being all the difference between him, and a man of real
consequence, in society, that there is between mock and real
pearl--between paste and diamond. It was true that young men of sounding
name and title were ever to be found in his train, thereby giving real
countenance to one from whom they fancied (till they found out their
mistake) that they themselves derived celebrity; thus enabling him to
effect a lodgement in the outskirts of aristocracy; but he could not
penetrate inland, so to speak, any more than foreign merchants can
advance farther than to Canton, in the dominions of the Emperor of
China.[22] He was only tolerated in the regions of real rank and
fashion--a fact of which he had a very galling consciousness; though it
did not, apparently, disturb his equanimity, or interrupt the systematic
and refined sycophancy by which alone he could secure his precarious
position.

With some sad exceptions, I think that Great Britain has reason to be
proud of her aristocracy. I do not speak now of those gaudy flaunting
personages, of either sex, who, by their excesses or eccentricities, are
eternally obtruding themselves, their manners, dress, and equipage, upon
the offended ear and eye of the public; but of those who occupy their
exalted sphere in simplicity, in calmness, and in unobtrusive dignity
and virtue. I am no flatterer or idolater of the nobility. I have a
profound sense of the necessity and advantage of the _institution_: but
I shall ever pay its _members_, personally, an honest homage only, after
a stern and keen scrutiny into their personal pretensions; thinking of
them ever in the spirit of those memorable words of Scripture--"_Unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required_," and that not
hereafter only, but HERE also. No one would visit their faults and
follies with a more unsparing severity than I; yet making all just
allowances for their peculiar perils and temptations, exposed, as they
are, especially at the period of their entrance upon life, to sedulous
and systematic sycophancy, too often also to artful and designing
profligacy. Can, however, anything excite greater indignation and
disgust in the mind of a thoughtful and independent observer than the
instances occasionally exhibited of persons of rank presumptuously
imagining that they enjoy a sort of prescriptive immunity from the
consequences of misconduct? An insolent or profligate nobleman is a
spectacle becoming every day more dangerous to exhibit in this country;
of that he may be assured.

Such are _my_ sentiments--those of a contented member of the middle
classes, with whom are all his best and dearest sympathies, and who
feels as stern a pride in his "Order," and determination to "_stand by
it_" too, as ever was felt or avowed by the haughtiest aristocrat for
_his_; of one who, with very little personal acquaintance with the
aristocracy, has yet had opportunities of observing their conduct; and
sincerely and cheerfully expresses his belief, that very, very many of
them are worthy of all that they enjoy--are bright patterns of honor,
generosity, loyalty, and virtue; that, indeed, of by far the greater
proportion of them it may be said that they

    "Have borne their faculties so meek--have been
    So clear in their great office, that their virtues
    Will plead like angels."

And finally, I say these are the sentiments of one who, if that Order
were in jeopardy, would, with the immense majority of his brethren of
the middle classes, freely shed his blood in defence of it: for its
preservation is essential to the well-being of society, and its
privileges are really ours.

To return, however, to the marquis. The means to which, as I have above
explained, he resorted for the purpose, secured him a certain species of
permanent popularity. In matters of dress and equipage, he could really
set the fashion; and being something of a practical humorist, and
desirous of frequent exhibitions of his influence in order to enhance
his pretensions with his patrons--and being also greatly applauded and
indulged by the tradespeople profiting by the vagaries of fashion, he
was very capricious in the exercise of his influence. He seized the
opportunity of the advent of my little hero, to display his powers very
advantageously. He waved his wand over Titmouse, and instantly
transformed a little ass into a great lion. 'Twas the marquis, who with
his own hand had sketched off, from fancy, the portrait of Titmouse,
causing it to be exhibited in almost every bookseller's shop-window.
Well knew the marquis, that had he chosen to make his appearance once or
twice in the parks, and leading streets and squares, in--for
instance--the full and imposing evening costume of the clown at the
theatre, with cunningly colored countenance, capacious white
inexpressibles, and tasteful cap and jacket--within a few days' time
several thousands of clowns would make their appearance about town,
turning it into a vast pantomime. Could a more striking instance of the
marquis's power in such matters have been exhibited, than that which had
actually occurred in the case of Titmouse? Soon after the novel of
Tippetiwink had rendered our friend an object of public interest, the
marquis happened, somewhere or other, to catch a glimpse of the
preposterous little ape. His keen eye caught all Titmouse's personal
peculiarities at a glance; and a day or two afterwards he appeared in
public, a sort of splendid edition of Titmouse--with quizzing-glass
stuck in his eye and cigar in his mouth; taper ebony cane; tight
surtout, with the snowy corner of a white handkerchief peeping out of
the outside breast-pocket; hat with scarce any rim perched slantingly on
his head; satin stock bespangled with inwrought gold flowers;
shirt-collar turned down; and that inimitable strut of his!--'Twas
enough; the thoughtful young men about town were staggered for a moment;
but their senses soon returned. _The marquis_ had stamped the thing with
his fiat; and within three days' time, that bitter wag had called forth
a flight of _Titmice_ which would have reminded you, for a moment, of
the visitation of locusts brought upon Egypt by Moses. Thus had been
effected the state of things, recorded towards the close of the
preceding chapter of this history. As soon as the marquis had seen a few
of the leading fools about town fairly in the fashion, he resumed his
former rigid simplicity of attire; and, accompanied by a friend or two
in his confidence, walked about the town enjoying his triumph;
witnessing his trophies--"Tittlebats" and "Titmouseties" filling the
shop-windows on the week-days, and peopling the streets on Sundays. The
marquis was not long in obtaining an introduction to the quaint little
_millionaire_, whose reputation he had, conjointly with his
distinguished friend Mr. Bladdery Pip, contributed so greatly to extend.
Titmouse, who had often heard of him, looked upon him with inconceivable
reverence, and accepted an invitation to one of the marquis's
_recherché_ Sunday dinners, with a sort of tremulous ecstasy. Thither on
the appointed day he went accordingly, and, by his original humor,
afforded infinite amusement to the marquis's other guests. 'Twas lucky
for Titmouse that, getting dreadfully drunk very early in the evening,
he was utterly incapacitated from accompanying his brilliant and
good-natured host to one or two scenes of fashionable entertainment, in
St. James's Street, as had been arranged between the marquis and a few
of his friends!

Let us pause now to ask whether this poor little creature was not to be
pitied? Did he not seem to have been plucked out of his own sphere of
safe and comparatively happy obscurity, only in order to become every
one's game--an object of everybody's cupidity and cruelty? May he not be
compared to the flying-fish, who, springing out of the water to avoid
his deadly pursuer there, is instantly pounced upon by his ravenous
assailants in the air? In the lower, and in the upper regions of
society, was not this the condition of poor Tittlebat Titmouse? Was not
his long-coveted advancement merely a transition from scenes of vulgar
to refined rapacity? Had he, ever since "_luck_ had happened to him,"
had one single _friend_ to whisper in his ear one word of pity and of
disinterested counsel? In the splendid regions which he had entered,
who regarded him otherwise than as a legitimate object for plunder or
ridicule, the latter disguised by the _designing_ only? Was not even his
dignified and exemplary old kinsman, the Earl of Dreddlington, Right
Honorable as he was, influenced solely by considerations of paltry
self-interest? Had he not his own ridiculous and mercenary designs to
accomplish, amid all the attentions he vouchsafed to bestow upon
Titmouse? 'Twas, I think, old Hobbes of Malmesbury who held, that the
natural state of mankind was one of war with each other. One really sees
a good deal in life, especially after tracing the progress of society,
that would seem to give some color to so strange a notion. 'Twas, of
course, at first a matter of downright fisticuffs--of physical strife,
occasioned, in a great measure, by our natural tendencies, according to
him of Malmesbury; and aggravated by the desire which everybody had, to
take away from everybody else what he had. In process of time we have,
in a measure, dropped the physical part of the business; and instead of
punching, scratching, kicking, biting, and knocking down one another,
still true to the original principles of our nature, we are all
endeavoring to circumvent one another: everybody is trying to take
everybody in; the moment that one of us has got together a thing or two,
he is pounced upon by his neighbor, who in his turn falls a prey to
another, and so on in endless succession. We cannot effectually help
ourselves, though we are splitting our heads to discover devices by way
of laws, to restrain this propensity of our nature: it will not do; we
are all overreaching, cheating, swindling, robbing one another, and, if
necessary, are ready to ruin, maim, and murder one another in the
prosecution of our designs. So is it with nations as with individuals,
and minor collections of individuals. Truly, truly, we are a precious
set, whether the sage of Malmesbury be right or wrong in his
speculations!----

The more that the earl and Lady Cecilia perceived of Titmouse's
popularity, the more eager were they in parading their connection with
him, and openly investing him with the character of a protégé. In
addition to this, the Lady Cecilia had begun to have now and then a
glimmering notion of the objects which the earl was contemplating. If
the earl, having taken him down to the House of Lords, and secured him a
place at the bar, would, immediately on entering, walk up to him, and be
seen for some time--august instructor!--condescendingly pointing out to
him the different peers by name, as they entered, and explaining to his
intelligent auditor the period, and mode, and cause, of the creation and
accession of many of them to their honors, and also the forms,
ceremonies, and routine of business in the House; so Lady Cecilia was
not remiss in availing herself, in her way, of the little opportunities
which presented themselves. She invited him, for instance, one day early
in the week, to accompany them to church on the ensuing Sunday, and
during the interval gave out among her intimate friends that they might
expect to see Mr. Titmouse in her papa's pew. The lion accepted the
invitation; and, on the arrival of the appointed hour, might have been
seen in the earl's carriage, driving to attend the afternoon's service,
at the Reverend MORPHINE VELVET'S chapel--_Rosemary_ Chapel, near St.
James's Square. 'Twas a fashionable chapel; a chapel _of Ease_: rightly
so called, for it was a very _easy_ mode of worship, discipline, and
doctrine that was there practised and inculcated. If I may adopt without
irreverence the language of Scripture, but apply it very differently, I
should say that Mr. Morphine Velvet's yoke was _very_ "easy," his burden
_very_ "light." He was a popular preacher; middle-aged; sleek, serene,
solemn in his person and demeanor. He had a very gentlemanlike
appearance in the pulpit and reading-desk. There was a sort of soothing,
winning elegance and tenderness in the tone and manner in which he
"_prayed_" and "_besought_" his "dearly beloved brethren, as many as
were there present, to accompany him," their bland and graceful pastor,
"to the throne of the heavenly grace!" Fit leader was he of such a
flock. He read the prayers remarkably well, in a quiet and subdued tone,
very distinctly, and with marked emphasis and intonation--in fact, in a
most gentlemanly manner--having sedulously studied under a crack
theatrical teacher of elocution, who had given him several "points"--in
fact, a new reading entirely of one of the clauses in the Lord's Prayer;
and which, he had the gratification of perceiving, produced a striking,
if not, indeed, a startling effect. On the little finger of the hand
which he used most, was to be observed the sparkle of a diamond ring;
and there was a sort of careless grace in the curl of his hair, which it
had taken his hairdresser at least half an hour, before Mr. Velvet's
leaving home for his chapel, to secure. In the pulpit he was calm and
fluent. _That_, he rightly considered, ought not to be the scene for
attempting intellectual display. He took care, therefore, that there
should be nothing in his sermons to arrest the _understanding_, or
unprofitably occupy it; addressing himself entirely to the feelings and
fancy of his cultivated audience, in frequently interesting and even
charming imaginative compositions. On the occasion I am speaking of, he
took for his text a fearful passage of Scripture, 2 Cor. iv. 3,--"_But
if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost._" If any words
were calculated to startle such a congregation as was arrayed before Mr.
Velvet, out of their guilty and fatal apathy, were not these? Ought not
their minister to have looked round him and trembled? So one would have
thought; but "_dear_ Mr. Velvet" knew his mission and his flock better.
He presented them with an elegant description of heaven, with its
crystal battlements, its jasper walls, its buildings of pure gold, its
foundations of precious stones; its balmy air, its sounds of mysterious
melody, its overflowing fulness of everlasting happiness--amid which
friends, parted upon earth by the cruel stroke of death, recognize and
are reunited to each other, never more to pronounce the agonizing word
"adieu!" And would his dear hearers be content to lose all this--content
to _enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season_? Forbid it, eternal
mercy!--But lest a strain like this should disturb or distress his
hearers, he took the opportunity to enforce and illustrate the
consolatory truth that--

    "Religion never was design'd
    To _make our pleasures less_;"

and presently resuming the thread of his discourse, went on to speak of
the unquestionably serious consequences attending a persevering
indifference to religion; and proceeded to give striking instances of it
in--the merchant in his counting-house, and on 'change; the lawyer in
his office; the tradesman in his shop; the operative in the manufactory;
showing how each was absorbed in his calling--_laboring for the meat
which perisheth_, till he had lost all appetite and relish for spiritual
food, and never once troubled himself about "the momentous concerns of
hereafter!" Upon these topics he dwelt with such force and feeling, that
he sent his distinguished congregation away--those of them, at least,
who could retain any recollection of what they had heard for five
minutes after entering their carriages--with lively fears that there was
a very black look-out, indeed, for--the kind of persons whom Mr. Velvet
had mentioned--viz. tailors, milliners, mercers, jewellers, and so
forth; and who added graver offences, and of a more positive character,
to the misconduct which he had pointed out--in their extortion and their
rapacity! Would that some of them had been present!--Thus was it that
dear Mr. Velvet sent away his hearers overflowing with Christian
sympathy; very well pleased with Mr. Velvet, but infinitely better
pleased with themselves! The deep impression he had made, was evidenced
by a note which he received that evening from the Duchess of Broadacre;
most earnestly begging permission to copy his "beautiful sermon," in
order to send it to her sister, Lady Belle Almacks, who (through early
dissipation) was ill of a decline at Naples. I may as well here mention,
that about the time of which I am speaking, there came out an engraved
portrait of "the Rev. Morphine Velvet, M. A., Minister of Rosemary
Chapel, St. James," and a very charming picture it was, representing the
aforesaid Mr. Velvet in pulpit costume and attitude, with hands
gracefully outstretched, and his face directed upward, with a heavenly
expression; suggesting to you the possibility that some fine day, when
his hearers least expected it, he might gently rise out of his pulpit
into the air, like Stephen, with heaven open before him, and _be no more
seen of men!_

Four or five carriages had to set down before that containing the Earl
of Dreddlington, Lady Cecilia, and Mr. Titmouse, could draw up; by which
time there had accumulated as many in its rear, so eager were the pious
aristocrats to get into this _holy retreat_. As Titmouse, holding his
hat and cane in one hand, while with the other he arranged his hair,
strutted up the centre aisle, following the earl and Lady Cecilia, he
could hardly repress the exultation with which he thought of a former
visit of his to that very fabric some two years before. _Then_, on
attempting to enter the body of the chapel, the vergers had politely but
firmly repulsed him; on which, swelling with vexation, he had ascended
to the gallery, where, after having been kept standing for ten minutes
at least, he had been beckoned by the pew-opener towards, and squeezed
into, the furthermost pew, close at the back of the organ, and in which
said pew were two powdered footman. If disgusted with his mere
contiguity, guess what must have been his feelings when his nearest
companion good-naturedly forced upon him a part of his prayer-book;
which Titmouse, ready to spit in his face, held with his finger and
thumb, as though it had been the tail of a snake! _Now_, how changed was
all! He had become an aristocrat; in his veins ran some of the richest
and oldest blood in the country; his brow might ere long be graced by
the coronet which King Henry II. had placed upon the brow of the founder
of his family, some seven hundred years before; and a tall footman, with
powdered head, glistening silver shoulder-knot, and sky-blue livery, and
carrying in a bag the gilded implements of devotion, was humbly
following behind him! What a remarkable and vivid contrast between his
present and his former circumstances, was present at that moment to his
reflecting mind! As he stood, his hat covering his face, in an attitude
of devotion--"I wonder," thought he, "what all these nobs and swells
would say, if they knew the sort of figure I had cut here on the last
time?" and again--"'Pon my life, what would I give for--say
Huckaback--to see me just now!" What an elegant and fashionable air the
congregation wore! Surely there _must_ be something in religion, when
people such as were around him came so punctually to church, and behaved
so seriously! The members of that congregation were, indeed, exemplary
in their strict discharge of their public religious duties! Scarce one
of them was there who had not been at the opera till twelve o'clock
over-night; the dulcet notes of the singers were still thrilling in
their ears, the graceful attitudes of the dancers still present to their
eyes. Every previous night of the week had they been engaged in the
brilliant ball-room, and whirled in the mazes of the voluptuous waltz,
or glittering in the picturesque splendor of fancy dress, till three,
four, and five o'clock in the morning: yet here they were in the house
of God, in spite of all their exhaustion, testified by the heavy eye,
the ill-suppressed yawn, the languor and ennui visible in their
countenances, prepared to accompany their polite pastor, "with a pure
heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace," to
acknowledge, with lively emotion, that they "had followed too much the
devices and desires of their own hearts;" praying for "mercy upon them,
miserable offenders," that God would "restore them, being penitent," so
that "they might thereafter lead a godly, righteous, and sober life."
Here they were, punctual to their time, decorous in manner, devout in
spirit, earnest and sincere in repentance and good resolutions--knowing,
nevertheless the while, how would be spent the remainder of the
season--of their _lives_; and yet resolving to attend to the
respectfully affectionate entreaties of Mr. Velvet, to be "_not hearers
only, but doers of the word_." Generally, I should say, that the state
of mind of most, if not all of those present, was analogous to that of
persons who sit in the pump-room, to drink the Bath or Cheltenham
waters. Everybody did the same thing; and each hoped that, while sitting
in his pew, what he heard would, like what he drank at the pump-room, in
some secret mode of operation, insensibly benefit the hearer, without
subjecting him to any unpleasant restraint or discipline--without
requiring active exertion, or inconvenience, or sacrifice. This will
give you a pretty accurate notion of Lord Dreddlington's state of mind
upon the present occasion. With his gold glasses on, he followed with
his eye, and also with his voice, every word of the prayers, with rigid
accuracy and unwavering earnestness; but as soon as Mr. Velvet had
mounted the pulpit, and risen to deliver his discourse, the earl quietly
folded his arms, closed his eyes, and, in an attentive posture,
dignifiedly composed himself to sleep. Lady Cecilia sat beside him
perfectly motionless during the whole sermon, her eyes fixed languidly
upon the preacher. As for Titmouse, he bore it pretty well for about
five minutes; then he pulled his gloves off and on at least twenty
times; then he twisted his handkerchief round his fingers; then he
looked with a vexed air at his watch; then he stuck his glass in his
eye, and stared about him. By the time that Mr. Velvet had ceased,
Titmouse had conceived a very great dislike to him, and was indeed in a
fretful humor. But when the organ struck up, and they rose to go; when
he mingled with the soft, crushing, fluttering, rustling, satin-clad
throng--nodding to one, bowing to another, and shaking hands with a
third, he felt "himself again." The only difference between him and
those around him was, that _they_ had learned to bear with calm
fortitude what had so severely tried _his_ temper. All were glad to get
out: the crash of carriages at the door was music in their ears--the
throng of servants delightful objects to their eyes--they were, in
short, in the dear world again, and breathed as freely as ever!

Mr. Titmouse took leave of the earl and Lady Cecilia at their
carriage-door, having ordered his cab to be in waiting--as it was; and
entering it, he drove about leisurely till it was time to think of
dressing for dinner. He had accepted an invitation to dine with a party
of officers in the Guards, and a merry time they had on't. Titmouse in
due time got blind drunk; and then one of his companions, rapidly
advancing towards the same happy state, seized the opportunity, with a
burned cork, to blacken poor Titmouse's face all over--who thereupon
was pronounced to bear a very close resemblance to one of the black boys
belonging to the band of the regiment; and thus, when dead drunk,
afforded nearly as much fun to his companions as when sober. As he was
quite incapable of taking care of himself, they put a servant with him
into his cab, (judging his little tiger to be unequal to the
responsibility.)

Titmouse passed a sad night, but got better towards the middle of the
ensuing day; when he was sufficiently recovered to receive two visitors.
One of them was young Lord Frederic Feather, (accompanied by a friend,)
both of whom had dined in company with Titmouse over-night; and his
Lordship it was, who, having decorated Titmouse's countenance in the way
I have described--so as to throw his valet almost into fits on seeing
him brought home--imagining it might possibly come to his ears who it
was that had done him such a favor, had come to acknowledge and
apologize for it frankly and promptly. When, however, he perceived what
a fool he had got to deal with, he suddenly changed his course--declared
that Titmouse had not only done it himself, but had then presumed to act
similarly towards his Lordship, whose friend corroborated the
charge--and they had called to receive, in private, _an apology_!
Titmouse's breath seemed taken away on first hearing this astounding
version of the affair. He swore that he had done nothing of the sort,
but had _suffered_ a good deal; dropping, however, from the tight rope,
on observing the stern looks of his companions, he protested that at all
events "he did not recollect" anything of the kind; on which they smiled
good-naturedly, and said that _that_ was very possible. Then Titmouse
made the requisite apology; and thus this "awkward affair" ended. Lord
Frederic continued for some time with Titmouse in pleasant chat; for he
foresaw that, "hard up" as he frequently was, Mr. Titmouse was a friend
who might be exceedingly serviceable. In fact, poor Lord Frederic could,
on that very occasion, have almost gone on his knees for a check of Mr.
Titmouse upon his bankers for a couple of hundred pounds. Oh, thought
that "noble" young spark--what would _he_ have given to be in Titmouse's
position, with his twenty thousand a-year, and a hundred thousand pounds
of hard cash! But, as the reader well knows, poor Titmouse's resources,
ample as they were, were upon a far less splendid scale than was
supposed. Partly from inclination, and partly through a temporary sense
of embarrassment, occasioned by the want of ready money, Titmouse did
not spend a tenth part of the sum which it had been everywhere supposed
he could disburse freely on all hands: and this occasioned him to be
given credit for possessing all that rumor assigned to him; and,
moreover, for a disposition not to squander it. He had several times
been induced to try his hand at écarté, rouge et noir, and hazard; and
had, on the first occasion or two, been a little hurried away, through
deference to his distinguished associates, and bled rather freely; but
when he found that it was a matter of _business_--that he must
_pay_--and felt his purse growing lighter, and his pocket-book, in which
he kept his bank-notes, rapidly shrinking in dimensions as the evening
wore on, he experienced vivid alarm and disgust, and an increasing
disinclination to be "victimized;" and his aversion to play was
infinitely strengthened by the frequent cautions of his distinguished
and disinterested monitor, the Earl of Dreddlington.

But there was one step in Mr. Titmouse's upward progress which he
presently took, and which is worthy of special mention; I mean his
presentation at court by the Earl of Dreddlington. The necessity for
such a move was explained to Titmouse by his illustrious kinsman, a day
or two after the appearance of the ordinary official announcement of the
next levee. This momentous affair was broached by the earl, one day
after dinner, with an air of almost mysterious anxiety and interest.
Had, indeed, that stately and solemn old simpleton been instructing his
gaping protégé, in the minutely-awful etiquettes requisite for the due
discharge of his duties, as an ambassador sent upon a delicate and
embarrassing mission to the court of his Sacred Majesty the King of
Sulkypunctilio, he could not have appeared more penetrated by a sense of
the responsibility he was incurring. He commenced by giving Titmouse a
very long history of the origin and progress of such ceremonies, and a
minute account of the practical manner of their observance, all of
which, however, was to Titmouse only like breathing upon a
mirror--passing as quickly out of one ear as it had entered into the
other. When, however, the earl came to the point of dress, Titmouse was
indeed "a thing all ear, all eye," his little faculties being stimulated
to their utmost. The next morning he hurried off to his tailor, to order
a court dress. When it had been brought home for trial, and he had put
it on, upon returning to his room in his new and imposing costume, and
glancing at his figure in the glass, his face fell; and he felt
infinitely disappointed. It is to be remembered in candor, however, that
he had not on lace ruffles at his coat-cuffs, nor on his shirt-front.
After gazing at himself for a few moments in silence, he suddenly
snapped his fingers, and exclaimed to the tailor, who, with the valet,
was standing beside him, "Curse me if I like this thing at all!"

"Not like it, sir!" exclaimed Mr. Clipclose, with astonishment.

"No, I don't, demme! Is _this_ a court dress? It's a quaker's made into
a footman's! 'Pon my soul, I look the exact image of a footman; and a
devilish vulgar one too!" The two individuals beside him turned
suddenly away--looking in different directions--and from their noses
there issued the sounds of ill-suppressed laughter.

"Oh, sir--I beg a thousand pardons!"--quickly exclaimed Mr. Clipclose,
"what can I have been thinking about? There's the sword--we've quite
forgot it!"

"Ah--'pon my life, I thought there was _something_ wrong!" quoth
Titmouse, as Mr. Clipclose, having brought the sword from the table at
the other end of the room, where he had laid it upon entering, buckled
it upon his distinguished customer.

"I flatter myself that _now_, sir"--commenced he.

"Ya--as--Quite the correct thing! 'Pon my soul--must say--most uncommon
striking!"--exclaimed Titmouse, glancing at his figure in the glass,
with a triumphant smile. "Isn't it odd, now, that this sword should make
all the difference between me and a footman, by Jove?" Here his two
companions were seized with a simultaneous fit of coughing.

"Ah, ha--it's _so_, a'n't it?" continued Titmouse, his eyes glued to the
glass.

"Certainly, sir," replied Mr. Clipclose, "it undoubtedly gives--what
shall I call it? a grace--a finish--a sort of commanding
appearance--especially to a figure that becomes it"--he continued with
cool assurance, observing that the valet understood him. "But--may I,
sir, take so great a liberty? If you are not accustomed to wear a
sword--as I think you said you had not been at court before--I beg to
remind you that it will require particular care to manage it, and
prevent it from getting between"----

"Demme, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse, turning round with an offended
air--"d'ye think I don't know how to manage a sword? By all that's
tremendous"--and plucking the taper weapon out of its scabbard, he
waved it over his head; and throwing himself into the first
position--he had latterly paid a good deal of attention to fencing--with
rather an excited air, he went through several of the preliminary
movements. 'Twas a subject for a painter, and exhibited a very striking
spectacle--as an instance of power silently concentrated, and ready to
be put forth upon an adequate occasion. The tailor and the valet, who
stood separate from each other, and at a safe and respectful distance
from Mr. Titmouse, gazed at him with silent admiration.

When the great day arrived--Titmouse having thought of scarce anything
else in the interval, and teased every one whom he had met with his
endless questions and childish observations on the subject--he drove up,
at the appointed hour, to the Earl of Dreddlington's; whose carriage,
with an appearance of greater state than usual about it, was standing at
the door. On alighting from his cab, he skipped so nimbly up-stairs,
that he could not have had time to observe the amusement which his
figure occasioned even to the well-disciplined servants of the Earl of
Dreddlington. Much allowance ought to have been made for them. Think of
Mr. Titmouse's little knee-breeches, white silks, silver shoe-buckles,
shirt ruffles and frills, coat, bag, and sword; and his hair, plastered
up with bear's grease, parted down the middle of his head, and curling
out boldly over each temple; and his open countenance irradiated with a
subdued smile of triumph and excitement! On entering the drawing-room he
beheld a really striking object--the earl in court costume, wearing his
general's uniform, with all his glistening orders, standing in readiness
to set off, and holding in his hand his hat, with its snowy plume. His
posture was at once easy and commanding. Had he been standing to Sir
Thomas Lawrence, he could not have disposed himself more effectively.
Lady Cecilia was sitting on the sofa, leaning back, and languidly
talking to him; and, from the start which they both gave on Titmouse's
entrance, it was plain that they could not have calculated upon the
extraordinary transmogrification he must have undergone, in assuming
court costume. For a moment or two, each was as severely shocked as when
his absurd figure had first presented itself in that drawing-room. "Oh,
heavens!" murmured Lady Cecilia: while the earl seemed struck dumb by
the approaching figure of Titmouse. That gentleman, however, was totally
changed from the Titmouse of a former day. He had now acquired a due
sense of his personal importance, a just confidence in himself.
Greatness had lost its former petrifying influence over him. And, as for
his appearance on the present occasion, _he_ had grown so familiar with
it, as reflected in his glass, that it never occurred to him that the
case might be different with others who beheld him for the first time.
The candor upon which I pride myself urges me to state, however, that
when Titmouse beheld the military air and superb equipments of the
earl--notwithstanding that Titmouse, too, wore a sword--he felt himself
_done_. He advanced, nevertheless, pretty confidently--bobbing about,
first to Lady Cecilia, and then to the earl; and after a hasty
salutation, observed,--"'Pon my life, my Lord, I hope it's no offence,
but your Lordship _does_ look most remarkable fine." The earl made no
reply, but inclined towards him magnificently--not seeing the meaning
and intention of Titmouse, but being affronted by his words.

"May I ask what your Lordship thinks of _me_? First time I ever appeared
in this kind of thing, my Lord--ha! ha, your Lordship sees!" As he
spoke, his look and voice betrayed the overawing effects of the earl's
splendid appearance, which was rapidly freezing up the springs of
familiarity, if not, indeed, of flippancy, which were bubbling up within
the little bosom of Titmouse, on his entering the room. His manner
became involuntarily subdued and reverential. The Earl of Dreddlington
in plain clothes, and in full court costume, were two very different
persons; though his Lordship would have been terribly mortified if he
had known that any one thought so. However much he now regretted having
offered to take Titmouse to the levee, there was no escape from the
calamity; so, after a few minutes' pause, his Lordship rang the bell,
and announced his readiness to set off. Followed by Mr. Titmouse, the
earl slowly descended the stairs; and when he was within two or three
steps of the hall floor, it distresses me to relate, that his Lordship
suddenly fell nearly flat upon his face, and, but for his servants'
rushing up, would have been seriously hurt. Poor Titmouse had been the
occasion of this dismal disaster; for his sword getting between his
legs, down he went against the earl, who went naturally down upon the
floor, as I have mentioned. Titmouse was not much hurt, but terribly
frightened, and became as pale as death when he looked at the earl; who
appeared a little agitated, but, not having been really injured, soon
recovered a considerable measure of self-possession. Profuse were poor
Titmouse's apologies, as may be supposed; but much as he was distressed
at what had taken place, a glance at the angry countenances with which
the servants regarded him, as if inwardly cursing his stupidity and
clumsiness, stirred up his spirit a little with a feeling of resentment.
He would have given a hundred pounds to have been able to discharge
every one of them on the spot!--

"Sir--enough has been said," quoth the earl, rather coldly and
haughtily, tired of the multiplied apologies and excuses of Titmouse. "I
thank God, sir, that I am not hurt, though at my time of life a fall is
not a slight matter. Sir," continued the earl, bitterly--again
interrupting Titmouse--"_you_ are not so much to blame as your tailor;
he should have explained to you how to wear your sword!" With this,
having cut Titmouse to the very quick, the earl motioned him towards the
door. They soon entered the carriage; the door was closed; and, with a
brace of footmen behind, away rolled these two truly distinguished
subjects to pay their homage to Majesty--which might well be proud of
such homage!--They both sat in silence for some time. At length--"Beg
your Lordship's pardon," quoth Titmouse, with some energy; "but I wish
your Lordship only knew how I _hate_ this cursed skewer that's pinned to
me:" and he looked at his sword, as if he could have snapped it into
halves, and thrown them through the window.

"Sir, I can appreciate your feelings. The sword was not to blame; and
_you_ have my forgiveness," replied the still ruffled earl.

"Much obliged to your Lordship," replied Titmouse, in a somewhat
different tone from any in which he had ever ventured to address his
august companion; for he was beginning to feel confoundedly nettled at
the bitter contemptuous manner which the earl observed towards him. He
was also not a little enraged with himself; for he knew he had been in
fault, and thought of the neglected advice of his tailor. So his natural
insolence, like a reptile just beginning to recover from its long
torpor, made a faint struggle to show itself--but in vain; he was quite
cowed and overpowered by the Presence in which he was, and he wished
heartily that he could have recalled even the few last words he had
ventured to utter. The earl had observed his presumptuous flippancy of
manner, though without appearing to do so. His Lordship was accustomed
to control his feelings; and on the present occasion made some effort to
do so, for fear of alienating Titmouse from him by any display of
offended dignity.

"Sir, it is a very fine day," he observed in a kind manner, after a
stern silence of at least five minutes.

"Remarkable fine, my Lord. I was just going to say so," replied
Titmouse, greatly relieved; and presently they fell into their usual
strain of conversation.

"We must learn to bear these little annoyances calmly," said the earl,
graciously, on Titmouse's again alluding to his mishap;--"as for me,
sir, a person in the station to which it has pleased Heaven to call me,
for purposes of its own, has his peculiar and very grave
anxieties--substantial anx"----

He ceased suddenly. The carriage of his old rival, the Earl of
Fitz-Walter, passed him; the latter waved his hand courteously; the
former, with a bitter smile, was forced to do the same; and then
relapsing into silence, showed that _the iron was entering his soul_.
Thus the earl in his own person afforded a striking illustration of the
truth of the observation which he had been making to Titmouse. Soon,
however, they had entered the scene of splendid hubbub, which at once
occupied and excited both their little minds. Without, was the eager
crowd, gazing with admiration and awe at each equipage, with its
brilliant occupants, that dashed past them:--then the life-guardsmen, in
glittering and formidable array, their long gleaming swords and polished
helmets glancing and flashing in the sunlight. Within, were the tall
yeomen of the guard, in black velvet caps and scarlet uniforms, and with
ponderous partisans, lining each side of the staircase--and who, being
in the exact military costume of the time of Henry the Eighth, forcibly
recalled those days of pomp and pageantry to the well-informed mind of
Mr. Titmouse. In short, for the first time in his life, he beheld, and
was overwhelmed by, the grandeur, state, and ceremony which fence in the
dread approaches to MAJESTY. He was, fortunately, far too much
bewildered and flustered, to be aware of the ill-concealed tittering and
even laughter which his appearance excited, wherever he went. In due
course he was borne on, and issued in due form into the presence
chamber--into the immediate presence of Majesty. His heart palpitated;
his dazzled eye caught a hasty glimpse of a tall magnificent figure and
a throne. Advancing--scarce aware whether on his head or his heels--he
reverently paid his homage--then rising, was promptly ushered out
through a different door; with no distinct impression of anything that
he had witnessed!--'twas all a dazzling blaze of glory--a dim vision of
awe! Little was he aware, poor soul, that the king had required him to
be pointed out upon his approach, having heard of his celebrity in
society; and that he had had the distinguished honor of occasioning to
Majesty a very great effort to keep its countenance. It was not till
after he had quitted the palace for some time, that he breathed freely
again. Then he began to feel as if a vast change had been effected in
him by some mysterious and awful agency--that he was penetrated and
pervaded, as it were, by the subtle essence of royalty--like one having
experienced the sudden, strange, thrilling, potent influence of
electricity. He imagined that now the stamp of greatness had been
impressed upon him; that his pretensions had been ratified by the
highest authority upon earth. 'Twas as if wine had been poured into a
stream, intoxicating the _tittlebats_ swimming about in it!--As for me,
however, seriously speaking, I question whether anything more than an
_imaginary_ change had come over my friend. Though I should be sorry to
quote against him language with which I have reason to believe he was
not _critically_ acquainted, I cannot help expressing an opinion that
Horace must have had in his eye a ROMAN TITMOUSE, when he penned those
bitter lines--

    "Licèt superbus ambules pecuniâ
      FORTUNA NON MUTAT GENUS.
    --Videsne Sacram metiente te Viam
      Cum bis ter ulnaram togâ,
    Ut ora vertat huc et huc euntium,
      Liberrima indignatio?
    --'Sectus flagellis hic triumviralibus
      Præconis ad fastidium,
    Arat Falerni mille fundi jugera,
      Et Appiam mannis terit!'"[23]

While Titmouse was making this splendid figure in the upper regions of
society, and forming there every hour new and brilliant connections and
associations--in a perfect whirl of pleasure from morning to night--he
did not ungratefully manifest a total forgetfulness of the amiable
persons with whom he had been so familiar, and from whom he had received
so many good offices, in his earlier days and humbler circumstances. Had
it not, however--to give the devil his due--been for Gammon, (who was
ever beside him, like a mysterious pilot, secretly steering his little
bark amid the strange, splendid, but dangerous seas which it had now to
navigate,) I fear that, with Titmouse, it would have been--out of sight
out of mind. But Gammon, ever watchful over the real interests of his
charge, and also delighted, through the native goodness of his heart, to
become the medium of conferring favors upon others, conveyed from time
to time, to the interesting family of the Tag-rags, special marks of Mr.
Titmouse's courtesy and gratitude. At one time, a haunch of _doe_
venison would find its way to Mr. Tag-rag, to whom Gammon justly
considered that the distinction between buck and doe was unknown; at
another, a fine work-box and a beautifully bound Bible found its way to
good Mrs. Tag-rag; and lastly, a gay guitar to Miss Tag-rag, who
forthwith began twang-twang, tang-a-tang-tanging it, from morning to
night, thinking with ecstasy of its dear distinguished donor; who,
together with Mr. Gammon, had, some time afterwards, the unspeakable
gratification, on the occasion of their being invited to dine at Satin
Lodge, of hearing her accompany herself with her beautiful instrument
while singing the following exquisite composition, for both the words
and air of which she had been indebted to her music-master, a youth with
black mustaches, long dark hair parted on his head, shirt-collars
à-la-Byron, and eyes full of inspiration!

                         TO HIM I LOVE.

                                1.

                      Ah me! I feel the smart
  _Affettuosamente._  Of Cupid's cruel dart
                      Quivering in my heart,
                                Heigho, ah! whew!


                                2.

                      With him I love
                      Swiftly time would move;
  _Allegro._          With his cigar,
                        And my guitar,
                          We'd smoke and play
                          The livelong day,
                                Merrily, merrily!
                                Puff--puff--puff,
                                Tang-a-tang, tang-a-tang?


                                3.

                      When he's not near me,
  _Adagio, et         O! of life I'm weary--
  con molto           The world is dreary--
  espressione._           Mystic spirits of song,
                          Wreathed with cypress, come along!
                            And hear me! hear me!
                                Singing,
                                  Heigho, heigho--
  _Teneramente._                  Tootle, tootle, too,
                                  A--lackaday!

Such were the tender and melting strains which this fair creature (her
voice a _little_ reedy and squeaking, it must be owned) poured into the
sensitive ear of Titmouse; and such are the strains by means of which,
many and many a Miss Tag-rag has captivated many and many a Titmouse; so
that sentimental compositions of this sort have become deservedly
popular, and do honor to our musical and poetical character as a nation.
I said that it was on the occasion of a dinner at Satin Lodge, that Mr.
Titmouse and Mr. Gammon were favored by hearing Miss Tag-rag's voice,
accompanying her guitar; for when Mr. Tag-rag had sounded Mr. Gammon,
and found that both he and Titmouse would be only too proud and happy to
partake of his hospitality, they were invited. A very crack affair it
was, (though I have not time to describe it)--given on a far more
splendid scale than Mr. Tag-rag had ever ventured upon before. He
brought a bottle of _champagne_ all the way from town with his own
hands, and kept it nice and cool in the kitchen cistern for three days
beforehand; and there was fish, soup, roast mutton, and roast ducks,
roast fowls, peas, cabbage, cauliflowers, potatoes, vegetable marrows;
there was an apple-pie, a plum-pudding, custards, creams, jelly, and a
man to wait, hired from the tavern at the corner of the hill. It had not
occurred to them to provide themselves with champagne glasses, so they
managed as well as they could with the common ones--all but Titmouse,
who with a sort of fashionable recklessness, to show how little he
thought of champagne, poured it out into his _tumbler_, which he
two-thirds filled, and then drank off its contents at a draught! Mr.
Tag-rag trying to disguise the inward spasm it occasioned him, by a very
grievous smile. He and Mrs. Tag-rag exchanged anxious looks; the whole
of their sole bottle of champagne was gone already--almost as soon as it
had been opened!

"I always drink this sort of stuff out of a tumbler; I do--'pon my
life," said Titmouse, carelessly; "it's a devilish deal more pleasant
than sipping it out of wine glasses!"

"Ye-e-s--of course it is, sir," said Mr. Tag-rag, rather faintly.
Shortly afterwards, Titmouse offered to take a glass of champagne with
Miss Tag-rag!--Her father's face flushed; and at length, with a bold
effort, "Why, Mr. Titmouse," said he, trying desperately to look
unconcerned--"the--the fact is, I never keep more than a dozen or so in
my cellar--and most unfortunately I found this afternoon that six
bottles had--burst--I assure you."

"'Pon my soul, sorry to hear it," quoth Titmouse, in a patronizing way;
"must send you a dozen of my own--I always keep about fifty or a hundred
dozen. Oh, I'll send you half a dozen!"

Tag-rag scarcely knew, for a moment, whether he felt pleased or
mortified at this stroke of delicate generosity. Thus it was that
Titmouse evinced a disposition to shower marks of his favor and
attachment upon the Tag-rags, in obedience to the injunctions of Gammon,
who assured him that it continued to be of very great importance for him
to secure the good graces of Mr. Tag-rag. So Mr. Titmouse now drove up
to Satin Lodge in his cab, and then rode thither, followed by his
stylish groom; and on one occasion, artful little scamp! happening to
find no one at home but Miss Tag-rag, he nevertheless alighted, and
stayed for nearly ten minutes, behaving precisely in the manner of an
accepted suitor, aware that he might do so with impunity since there was
no witness present; a little matter which had been suggested to him by
Mr. Gammon. Poor Miss Tag-rag's cheek he kissed with every appearance of
ardor, protesting that she was a monstrous lovely creature; and he left
her in a state of delighted excitement, imagining herself the destined
mistress of ten thousand a-year--the blooming bride of the gay and
fashionable Mr. Titmouse. When her excellent parents heard of what had
that day occurred between Mr. Titmouse and their daughter, they also
looked upon the thing as quite settled, and were eager in their
expressions of gratitude to Providence. In the mean while, the stream of
prosperity flowed steadily in upon Mr. Tag-rag, his shop continuing
crowded; his shopmen doubled in number:--in fact, he at length actually
received, instead of giving payment, for allowing young men to serve a
short time in so celebrated an establishment, in order that they might
learn the first-rate style of doing business, and when established on
their own account, write up over their doors--"Timothy Tape, _late from
Tag-rag & Co., Oxford Street_."

Determined to make hay while the sun shone, he resorted to several
little devices for that purpose, such as a shirt-front with frills in
the shape of a capital "T," and of which, under the name of "_Titties_,"
he sold immense numbers among the Eastern _swells_ of London. At length
it occurred to Gammon to suggest to Titmouse a mode of conferring upon
his old friend and master a mark of permanent, public, and substantial
distinction; and this was, the obtaining for him, through the Earl of
Dreddlington, an appointment as one of the _royal tradesmen_--namely,
draper and hosier to the king. When Mr. Tag-rag's disinterested and
indefatigable benefactor, Gammon, called one day in Oxford Street, and,
motioning him for a moment out of the bustle of his crowded shop,
mentioned the honor which Mr. Titmouse was bent upon doing his utmost,
at Mr. Gammon's instance, to procure for Mr. Tag-rag, that respectable
person was quite at a loss for terms in which adequately to express his
gratitude. Titmouse readily consented to name the thing to the great
man, and urge it in the best way he could; and he performed his promise.
The earl listened to his application with an air of anxiety. "Sir," said
he, "the world is acquainted with my reluctance to ask favors of those
in office. When I was in office myself, I felt the inconvenience of such
applications abundantly. Besides, the appointment you have named,
happens to be one of considerable importance, and requiring great
influence to procure it. Consider, sir, the immense number of tradesmen
there are of every description, of whom drapers and hosiers (according
to the last returns laid before Parliament at the instance of my friend
Lord Goose) are by far the most numerous. All of them are naturally
ambitious of so high a distinction: yet, sir, observe, that there is
only one king and one royal family to serve. My Lord Chamberlain is, I
have no doubt, harassed by applicants for such honors as you have
mentioned."

Hereat Titmouse got startled at the unexpected magnitude of the favor he
had applied for; and, declaring that he did not care a curse for
Tag-rag, begged to withdraw his application. But the earl, with a mighty
fine air, interrupted him--"Sir, you are not in the least presuming upon
your relationship with me, nor do I think you overrate the influence I
may happen--in short, sir, I will make it my business to see my Lord
KO-TOO this very day, and sound him upon the subject."

That same afternoon an interview took place between the two
distinguished noblemen, Lord Dreddlington and Lord Ko-too. Each
approached the other upon stilts. After a display of the most delicate
tact on the part of Lord Dreddlington, Lord Ko-too, who made a mighty
piece of work of it, promised to consider the application.




CHAPTER X.


Within a day or two afterwards, Mr. Tag-rag received a letter from the
Lord Chamberlain's office, notifying him that his Majesty had been
graciously pleased to appoint him draper and hosier to his Majesty! It
occasioned him feelings of tumultuous pride and pleasure, similar to
those with which the Earl of Dreddlington would have received tidings of
his long-coveted marquisate having been conferred upon him. He started
off, within a quarter of an hour after the receipt of the letter, to a
carver and gilder a few doors off, and gave orders for the immediate
preparation of a first-rate cast, gilded, of the royal arms; which, in
about a week's time, might be seen, a truly resplendent object,
dazzlingly conspicuous over the central door of Mr. Tag-rag's
establishment, inspiring awe into the minds of passers-by, and envy into
Mr. Tag-rag's neighbors and rivals. He immediately sent off letters of
gratitude to Mr. Titmouse, and to "the Right Honorable, the Most Noble
the Earl of Dreddlington;" to the latter personage, at the same time,
forwarding a most splendid crimson satin flowered dressing-gown, as "an
humble token of his gratitude for his Lordship's mark of particular
condescension."

Both the letter and the dressing-gown gave great satisfaction to the
earl's valet, (than whom they never got any farther,) and who, having
tried on the glistening addition to his wardrobe, forthwith sat down and
wrote a very fine reply, in his Lordship's name, to the note which had
accompanied it, taking an opportunity to satisfy his conscience, by
stating to the earl the next morning that a Mr. Tag-rag had "_called_"
to express his humble thanks for his Lordship's goodness. He was,
moreover, so well satisfied with this specimen of Mr. Tag-rag's
articles, that he forthwith opened an account with him, and sent a very
liberal order to start with. The same thing occurred with several of the
subordinate functionaries at the palace; and--to let my reader, a little
prematurely, however, into a secret--this was the extent of the
additional custom which Mr. Tag-rag's appointment secured him; and, even
for these supplies, I never heard of his getting paid. But it did
wonders with him in the estimation of the world. 'Twas evident that he
was in a fair way of becoming the head house in the trade. His
appointment caused no little ferment in that nook of the city with which
he was connected. The worshipful Company of Squirt-Makers elected him a
member; and on a vacancy suddenly occurring in the ward to which he
belonged, for he had a considerable shop in the city also, he was made a
common council-man. Mr. Tag-rag soon made a great stir as a champion of
civil and religious liberty. As for church and county rates, in
particular, he demonstrated the gross injustice and absurdity of calling
upon one who had no _personal_ occasion for the use of a church, of a
county bridge, a county jail, or a lunatic asylum, to be called upon to
contribute to the support of them. A few speeches in this strain
attracted so much attention to him, that several leading men in the ward
(a very "liberal" one) intimated to him that he stood the best chance of
succeeding to the honor of alderman on the next vacancy; and when he and
Mrs. Tag-rag were alone together, he would start the subject of the
expenses of the mayoralty with no little anxiety. He went to the chapel
no longer on foot, but in a stylish sort of covered gig, with a kind of
coal-scuttle shaped box screwed on behind, into which was squeezed his
footboy, (who, by the way, had a thin stripe of crimson let into each
leg of his trousers, upon Mr. Tag-rag's appointment to an office under
the Crown;) he was, also, always a trifle later in arriving at the
chapel, than he had been accustomed to be. He had a crimson velvet
cushion running along the front of his pew, and the Bibles and
hymn-books very smartly gilded. He was presently advanced to the honored
post of chief deacon; and on one occasion, in the unexpected absence of
the central luminary of the system, was asked to occupy the chair at a
"great meeting" of the SOCIETY FOR THE PROMOTION OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS
DISCORD; when he took the opportunity of declaring his opinion, which
was enthusiastically cheered, that the principles of free trade ought to
be applied to religion; and that the voluntary system was that which was
designed by God to secure the free blessings of competition in spiritual
teaching. As for Satin Lodge, he stuck two little wings to it; and had
one of the portraits of Tittlebat Titmouse (as Tippetiwink) hung over
his drawing-room mantel-piece, splendidly framed and glazed.

Some little time after Tag-rag had obtained the royal appointment, which
I have been so particular in recording, Gammon, _happening_ to be
passing his shop, stepped in, and observing Mr. Tag-rag, very cordially
greeted him; and then, as if it had been a thought of the moment only,
without taking him from the shop, intimated that he had been westward,
engaged in completing the formal details of a rearrangement of the
greater portion of Mr. Titmouse's extensive estates, upon which that
gentleman had recently determined, and the sight of Mr. Tag-rag's
establishment had suggested to Mr. Gammon, that possibly Mr. Tag-rag
would feel gratified at being made a party--for form's sake--to the
transaction; as Mr. Gammon was sure that Mr. Titmouse would feel
delighted at having associated with the Earl of Dreddlington, and one
or two other persons of distinction, in the meditated arrangement, the
name of so early and sincere a friend as Mr. Tag-rag; "one who,
moreover"--here Gammon paused, and gave a smile of inexpressible
significance, "but it was not for _him_ to hint his suspicions"----

"Sir--I--I--_will_ you come into my room?" interrupted Tag-rag, rather
eagerly, anxious to have a more definite indication of Mr. Gammon's
opinion; but that gentleman, looking at his watch, pleaded want of time,
and suddenly shaking Mr. Tag-rag by the hand, moved towards the door.

"You were talking of signing, sir--Have you got with you what you want
signed? I'll sign anything!--anything for Mr. Titmouse; only too
proud--it's quite an honor to be in any way connected with him!" Gammon,
on hearing this, felt in his pockets, as if he supposed that he should
find there what he perfectly well knew had been lying ready, cut and
dried, in his safe at Saffron Hill for months.

"I find I have not got the little document with me," said he,
carelessly; "I suppose it's lying about, with other loose papers, at the
office, or I may have left it at the earl's"--[though Gammon's objects
required him here to allude to the Earl of Dreddlington, I think it only
fair to say that he had never been, for one instant in his life, in that
great man's company.]

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Gammon." said Tag-rag, considering--"Your
office is at Saffron Hill? Well, I shall be passing in your direction
to-morrow, on my way to my city establishment, about noon, and will look
in and do all you wish."

"Could you arrange to meet the earl there?--or, as his Lordship's
movements are--ah, ha!--not very"----

"Should be most proud to meet his Lordship, sir, to express my personal
gratitude"----

"Oh, the earl never likes to be reminded, Mr. Tag-rag, of any little
courtesy or kindness he may have conferred! But if you will be with us
about twelve, we can wait a little while; and if his Lordship should not
be punctual, we must even let you sign first, ah, ha!--and explain it to
his Lordship on his arrival, for I know your time is very precious, Mr.
Tag-rag! Gracious! Mr. Tag-rag, what a constant stream of customers you
have!--I heard it said, the other day, that you were rapidly absorbing
all the leading business in your line in Oxford Street."

"You're very polite, Mr. Gammon! Certainly, I've no reason to complain.
I always keep the best of everything, both here and in the city, and
sell at the lowest prices, and spare no pains to please; and it's hard
if"----

"Ah, how do you do?" quoth Gammon, suddenly starting, and bowing to some
one on the other side of the way, whom he did _not_ see. "Well,
good-day, Mr. Tag-rag--good-day! To-morrow at twelve, by the way?"

"I'm yours to command, Mr. Gammon," replied Tag-rag; and so they parted.
Just about twelve o'clock the next day, the latter, in a great bustle,
saying he had fifty places to call at in the city, made his appearance
at Saffron Hill.

"His Lordship a'n't here, I suppose?" quoth he, after shaking hands with
Mr. Quirk and Mr. Gammon. The latter gentleman pulled out his watch,
and, shrugging his shoulders, said with a smile, "No--we'll give him
half an hour's grace."

"Half an hour, my dear sir!" exclaimed Tag-rag, "I couldn't stay so
long, even for the high honor of meeting his Lordship. I am a man of
business, he isn't; first come first served, you know, eh? All fair
that!" There were a good many recently engrossed parchments and writings
scattered over the table, and from among them Gammon, after tossing
them about for some time, at length drew out a sheet of foolscap. It was
stamped, and there was writing upon the first and second pages.

"Now, gentlemen, quick's the word--time's precious!" said Tag-rag,
taking up a pen and dipping it into the inkstand. Gammon, with an
unconcerned air, placed before him the document he had been looking for.
"Ah, how well I know the handwriting! That flourish of his--a sort of
boldness about it, a'n't there?" said Tag-rag, observing the signature
of Titmouse immediately above the spot on which he was going to place
his own; there being written in pencil, underneath, the word
"Dreddlington," evidently for the intended signature of the earl. "I'm
between two good ones, at any rate, eh?" said Tag-rag. Gammon or Quirk
said something about a "term to attend the inheritance"--"trustee of an
outstanding term"--"legal estate vested in the trustees"--"too great
power to be put in the hands of any but those of the highest honor."

"Stay!" quoth Gammon, ringing his little hand-bell--"nothing like
regularity, even in trifles." He was answered by one of the clerks, a
very dashing person--"We only wish you to witness a signature," said
Gammon. "Now, we shall release you, Mr. Tag-rag, in a moment. Say 'I
deliver this as my act and deed'--putting your finger on the little
wafer there."

So said and so did Mr. Tag-rag as he had been directed; the clerk wrote
his name under the witnessing clause, "Abominable Amminadab;" and from
that moment Mr. Tag-rag had unconsciously acquired an interest in the
future stability of Mr. Titmouse's fortunes, to the extent of some FORTY
THOUSAND POUNDS.

"_Now_, gentlemen, you'll make my compliments to his Lordship, and if he
asks how I came to sign before him, explain the hurry I was in. Time and
tide wait for no man. Good-morning, gentlemen; good-morning; best
regards to our friend, Mr. Titmouse." Gammon attended him to the door,
cordially shaking him by the hand, and presently returned to the room he
had just quitted, where he found Mr. Quirk holding in his hand the
document just signed by Tag-rag; which was, in fact, a joint and several
bond, conditioned in a penalty of forty thousand pounds, for the due
repayment, by Titmouse, of twenty thousand pounds, and interest at five
per cent, about to be advanced to him on mortgage of a portion of the
Yatton property. Gammon, sitting down, gently took the instrument from
Mr. Quirk, and with a bit of India-rubber calmly effaced the pencilled
signature of "_Dreddlington_."

"You're a ve--ry clever fellow, Gammon!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, presently,
with a sort of sigh, and after, as it were, holding his breath for some
time. Gammon made no reply. His face was slightly pale, and wore an
anxious expression. "It will do _now_," continued Mr. Quirk, rubbing his
hands, and with a gleeful expression of countenance.

"That remains to be seen," replied Gammon, in a low tone.

"Eh? What? Does anything occur--eh? By Jove, no screw loose, I hope?"

"No--but we're in _very deep water_ now, Mr. Quirk"----

"Well--devil only cares, so long as _you_ keep a sharp look-out, Gammon.
I'll trust the helm to you! I'll pit you against Old Nick any day,
friend Gammon!"

As Gammon did not seem in a talkative mood, Quirk shortly afterwards
left him.

Now, though Mr. Tag-rag is no favorite of mine, I begin to feel a good
deal of anxiety on his behalf. I wish he had not been in so vast a
"hurry," in a matter which required such grave deliberation, as
"signing, sealing, and delivering." When a man is called on to go
through so serious a ceremony, it would be well if he could be apprised
of the significance of the formula--_"I deliver this as my act and
deed."_ Thus hath expressed himself upon this point, a great authority
in the law, old Master Plowden. 'T is a passage somewhat quaint in form,
but not the less forcible and important in substance:--

     "Words are oft _spoken_ unadvisedly, and pass from men lightly and
     inconsiderately; but, where the agreement is by _deed_, there is
     more time for deliberation; for when a man passes a thing by deed,
     first, there is the determination of the mind to do it, and upon
     that he causes it to be _written_, which is one part of
     deliberation; and, afterwards, he _puts his seal to it_, which is
     another part of deliberation; and, lastly, he _delivers the writing
     as his deed_, which is the consummation of his resolution. So that
     there is great deliberation used in the making of deeds, for which
     reason they are received as a _lien_, final to the party, and are
     adjudged to bind the party, without examining upon what cause or
     consideration they were made."[24]

Possibly some one now reading these pages hath had most dismal
experience in the matter above mentioned; and I hope that such dismal
experience, a due reflection will avert from many a reader. As for
Tag-rag, it may turn out that our fears for him are groundless:
nevertheless _one hates to see men do important things in a
hurry_:--and, as we shall lose sight of Mr. Tag-rag for some time, there
can be no harm in wishing him well out of what he has just done.

    "If it were _done_ when 't is done, then 't were well
    It were done _quickly_"--

and not otherwise.

The London season was now advancing towards its close. Fine ladies were
sated and exhausted with operas, concerts, balls, routs, soirées,
assemblies, bazaars, fêtes, and the Park. Their lords were getting
tired of their clubs during the day, and hurried dinners, late hours,
foul air, and long speeches, at the two Houses; where, however they
might doze away the time, they could seldom get the luxury of a
downright nap for more than an hour or two together--always waking, and
fancying themselves in the tower of Babel, and that it was on fire, so
strange and startling were the lights and the hubbub! The very
whippers-in were looking jaded and done--each being like a Smithfield
drover's dog on a Monday night, which at length can neither bark nor
bite in return for a kick or a blow, and, hoarse and wearied, falls
asleep on his way home--a regular somnambulist. Where the Earl of
Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia were to pass their autumn, was a question
which they were beginning to discuss rather anxiously. Any one glancing
over their flourishing list of residences in England, Scotland, Wales,
and Ireland, which were paraded in the Peerages and Court Guides, would
have supposed that they had an ample choice before them: but the reader
of this history knows better. The mortifying explanation--mortifying to
the poor earl--having been once given by me, I shall not again do so.
Suffice it to say, that Poppleton Hall, Hertfordshire, had its
disadvantages; there they must keep up a full establishment, and receive
county company and other visitors--being in arrear with much
hospitality. 'Twas expensive work, also, at the watering-places; and
expensive and also troublesome to go abroad at the earl's advanced
period of life. Pensively ruminating on these matters one evening, they
were interrupted by a servant bringing in a note, which proved to be
from Titmouse--inviting them, in terms of profound courtesy and great
cordiality, to honor Yatton, by making a stay there during as great a
portion of the autumn as they could not better occupy. Mr. Titmouse
frankly added, that he could not avoid acknowledging some little degree
of selfishness in giving the invitation--namely, in expressing a hope
that the earl's presence would afford him, if so disposed, an
opportunity of introducing his host to any of the leading members of the
county who might be honored by the earl's acquaintance; that, situated
as Titmouse was, he owned to an increasing anxiety on that point. He
added, that he trusted the earl and Lady Cecilia would consider Yatton,
while they were there, as in all respects their own residence, and that
no exertion should be wanting to render their stay as agreeable as
possible. The humble appeal of Titmouse prevailed with his august
kinsman; who, on the next day, sent him a letter saying that his
Lordship fully recognized the claims which Mr. Titmouse had upon him as
the head of the family, and that his Lordship should feel very glad in
availing himself of the opportunity which offered itself, of placing Mr.
Titmouse on a proper footing of intercourse with the people of the
county. That, for this purpose, His Lordship should decline any
invitations they might receive to pass their autumn elsewhere, &c. &c.
&c. In plain English, they jumped (but as decorously as possible) at the
invitation. It had emanated originally from Gammon, who, from motives of
his own, had suggested it to Titmouse, bade him act upon it, and had
drawn up the letter conveying it. I say, from motives of his own, Gammon
was bent upon becoming personally acquainted with the earl, and fixing
himself, if possible, thoroughly in his Lordship's confidence. He had
contrived to ascertain from Titmouse, without that gentleman's being,
however, aware of it, that the few occasions on which his (Gammon's)
name had been mentioned by the earl, it had been accompanied by
slighting expressions--by indications of even dislike and suspicion.
Give him, however, thought he, but the opportunity, and he could very
soon change the nature of the earl's feelings towards him. As soon,
therefore, as the earl's acceptance of the invitation had been
communicated to Gammon, he resolved to be one of the guests at Yatton
during the time of the earl's stay--a step, into the propriety of which
he easily brought Mr. Quirk to enter, but which he did not, for the
present, communicate to Titmouse, lest he should, by prematurely
disclosing it to the earl, raise any obstacle, arising out of an
objection on the part of his Lordship; who, if he but found Gammon
actually _there_, must submit to the infliction with what grace he
might. In due time it was notified on the part of the earl, by his man
of business, to Mr. Titmouse, (who had gone down to Yatton,) through
_his_ man of business, that the earl, and a formidable portion of his
establishment, would make their appearance at Yatton by a named day. The
earl had chosen to extend the invitation to Miss Macspleuchan and also
to as many attendants as he thought fit to take with him, instead of
letting them consume their board wages in entire idleness in town or at
Poppleton. Heavens! what accommodation was required, for the earl, for
the Lady Cecilia, each of their personal attendants, Miss Macspleuchan,
and five servants! Then there were two other guests invited, in order to
form company and amusement for the earl--the Marquis Gants-Jaunes de
Millefleurs, and a Mr. Tuft. Accommodation must be had for these; and,
to secure it, Mr. Titmouse and Mr. Gammon were driven to almost the
extremities of the house. Four servants, in a sort of baggage-wagon,
preceded the arrival of the earl and Lady Cecilia by a day or two, in
order to "arrange everything;" and, somehow or another, one of the first
things that was done with this view, was to install his Lordship's chief
servants in the quarters of Mr. Titmouse's servants, who, it was
suggested, should endeavor to make themselves as comfortable as they
could in some little unfurnished rooms over the stables! And, in a word,
before Mr. Titmouse's grand guests had been at the Hall four-and-twenty
hours, there was established there the same freezing state and solemn
ceremony which prevailed in the earl's own establishment. Down came at
length, thundering through the village, the earl's dusty
travelling-carriage and four; himself, Lady Cecilia, and Miss
Macspleuchan within, his valet and Lady Cecilia's maid behind: presently
it wound round the park road, crashing and flashing through the gravel,
and rattling under the old gateway, and at length stood before the Hall
door--the reeking horses pulled up with a sudden jerk, which almost
threw them all upon their haunches. Mr. Titmouse was in readiness to
receive his distinguished visitors; the carriage-door was opened--down
went the steps--and in a few moments' time the proud old Earl of
Dreddlington and his proud daughter, having entered the Hall, had become
the guests of its flustered and ambitious little proprietor. While all
the visitors--great and small--are occupied in their dressing-rooms,
recovering themselves from the cramp and fatigue of a long journey, and
are preparing to make their appearance at dinner, let me take the
opportunity to give you a sketch of the only one of them, of the smaller
sort, to whom you are at present a stranger: I mean Mr. Tuft--Mr. VENOM
TUFT.

Oft hath an inexperienced mushroom-hunter, deceived at a distance, run
up to secure what seemed to be a fine cluster of mushrooms, growing
under the shade of a stately tree, but which, on stooping down to gather
them, he discovers with disappointment and disgust to be no mushrooms at
all, but vile, unwholesome--even poisonous funguses: which, to prevent
their similarly deluding others, he kicks up and crushes under foot. And
is not this a type of what often happens in society? Under the "cold
shade of aristocracy," how often is to be met with--the SYCOPHANT?--Mr.
Venom Tuft was one of them. His character was written in his face.
Disagreeable to look at--though _he_ thought far otherwise--he yet
contrived to make himself pleasant to be listened to, for a while, by
the languid and _ennuyé_ fashionable. He spoke ever--

                      "In a _toady's_ key,
    With bated breath and whispering humbleness."

His person was at once effeminate and coarse; his gesture and address
were cringing--there was an intolerable calmness and gentleness about
them at all times, but especially while laboring in his vocation. He had
the art of administering appropriate and acceptable flattery by a look
only, deferential and insinuating--as well as by words. He had always at
command a copious store of gossip, highly seasoned with scandal; which
he collected and prepared with industry and judgment. Clever toadies are
generally bitter ones. With sense enough to perceive, but not spirit
enough to abandon their odious propensities, they are aware of the
ignominious spectacle they exhibit before the eyes of men of the least
degree of independence and discernment, and whose open contempt they
have not power or manliness enough to resent. Then their smothered rage
takes an inward turn; it tends to, and centres in the tongue, from which
it falls in drops of scalding virus; and thus it is, that the functions
of sycophant and slanderer are so often found united in the same
miserable individual. Does a sycophant fancy that his patron--if one may
use such a term--is not aware of his degrading character and position?
Would that he could but hear himself spoken of by those in whose
presence he has last been prostrating himself! If he could but for one
moment "see himself as others see him"--surely he would instantly
wriggle out of the withering sight of man! But Mr. Tuft was not an
everyday toady. Being a clever man, it occurred to him as calculated
infinitely to enhance the value of his attentions, if he could get them
to be regarded as those of a man of some ability and reputation. So
reasonable a wish, as thus to rise to eminence in the calling in life to
which he had devoted himself--viz. toadyism--stimulated him to
considerable exertion, which was in time rewarded by a measure of
success; for he began to be looked on as _something_ of a literary man.
Then he would spend his mornings in reading up, in those quarters whence
he might cull materials for display in society at a later period of the
day; when he would watch his opportunity, or, if none presented itself,
make one, by diverting the current of conversation into the channel on
which was the gay and varied bordering of his very recent acquisitions.
All his knowledge was of this gossiping _pro hâc vice_ character.----He
was very skilful in administering his flattery. Did he dine with his
Grace, or his Lordship, whose speech in the House appeared in that or
the preceding day's newspapers? Mr. Tuft got it up carefully, and also
the speech in answer to it, with a double view--to show himself at home
in the question! and then to differ a little with his Grace, or his
Lordship, in order to be presently convinced, and set right by them! Or
when conversation turned upon the topics which had, over-night, called
up his Grace or his Lordship on his legs, Mr. Tuft would softly break in
by observing that such and such a point had been "admirably put in the
debate by _some one_ of the speakers--he did not recollect whom;" and on
being apprised of, and receiving a courteous bow from, the great man
entitled to the undesigned compliment, look _so_ surprised--almost,
indeed, piqued! Carefully, however, as he managed matters, he was soon
found out by _men_, and compelled to betake himself, with ten-fold
ardor, to the women, with whom he lasted a little longer. _They_
considered him a great literary man; for he could quote and criticise a
good deal of poetry, and abuse many novels. He could show that what
everybody else admired was full of faults; what all condemned was
admirable: so that the fair creatures were forced to distrust their own
judgment, in proportion as they deferred to his. He would allow no one
to be entitled to the praise of literary excellence except individuals
of rank, and one or two men of established literary reputation, who had
not thought it worth their while to repel his obsequious advances, or
convenient not to do so. Then he would polish the poetry of fine ladies,
touch up their little tales, and secure their insertion in fashionable
periodicals. On these accounts, and of his piquant tittle-tattle, no
soirée or conversazione was complete without him, any more than without
tea, coffee, ice, or lemonade. All toadies hate one another; but his
brethren both hated and feared Mr. Tuft; for he was not only so
successful himself, but possessed and used such engines for _depressing
them_. Mr. Tuft had hoped to succeed in being popped in by one of his
patrons for a snug little borough; but the great man got tired of him,
and turned him off, though the ladies of the family still secured him
occasional access to the dinner-table. He did not, however, make a very
grateful return for such good-natured condescensions. Ugly and ungainly
as he was, he yet imagined himself possessed of personal attractions for
the ladies, and converted their innocent and unsuspecting familiarities,
which had emanated from those confident in their purity and their
elevation, into tokens of the ascendency he had gained over them; and of
which, with equal cruelty, folly, and presumption, he would afterwards
boast pretty freely. Till this came, however, to be suspected and
discovered, Mr. Tuft visited a good many leading houses in town, and
spent no inconsiderable portion of each autumn at some one or other of
the country mansions of his patrons--from whose "castles," "halls,"
"abbeys," "priories," and "seats," he took great pride in dating his
letters to his friends. I must not forget to mention that he kept a
book, very gorgeously bound and embellished, with silver-gilt clasps,
and bearing on the back the words--"Book of Autographs;" but I should
have written it--"Trophies of Toadyism." This book contained autograph
notes of the leading nobility, addressed familiarly to himself, thus:--

     "The Duke of Walworth presents his compliments to Mr. Tuft, and
     feels particularly obliged by," &c.

     "The Duchess of Diamond hopes Mr. Tuft will not forget to bring
     with him this evening," &c.

     "The Marquis of M---- has the honor to assure Mr. Tuft that," &c.

     "Dear Mr. Tuft,

     "Why were you not at ---- House last night? We were dreadfully dull
     without you! X ---- just as stupid as you always say he _is_."

     [This was from a very pretty and fashionable countess, whose
     initials it bore.]

     "If Mr. Tuft is dead, Lady Dulcimer requests to be informed when
     his funeral will take place, as she, together with a host of
     mourners, intends to show him a last mark of respect."

     "Dear Mr. Tuft,

     "The poodle you brought me has got the mange, or some horrid
     complaint or other, which is making all his hair fall off. Do come
     and tell me what is to be done. Where can I send the sweet
     suffering angel?--Yours,

                                                       ARABELLA D----."

     [This was from the eldest and loveliest daughter of a very great
     duke.]

     "The Lord Chancellor presents his compliments, and begs to
     acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Venom Tuft's obliging present of his
     little '_Essay on Greatness_.'"

These are samples, taken at random, of the contents of Mr. Tuft's book
of autographs, evidencing abundantly the satisfactory terms of intimacy
upon which he lived with the great; and it was ecstasy to him, to see
this glittering record of his triumphs glanced over by the envious
admiring eyes of those in his own station in society. How he delighted
to be asked about the sayings and doings of the exclusive circles! How
confidentially would he intimate the desperate condition of a sick
peer--an expected _éclaircissement_ of some fashionable folly and
crime--or a move to be made in the Upper House that evening! Poor Tuft
little suspecting (lying so snug in his shell of self-conceit) how
frequently he fell, on these occasions, among the Philistines--and was,
unconsciously to himself, being trotted out by a calm sarcastic
hypocrite, for the amusement of the standers-by, just as a little monkey
is poked with a stick to get up and exhibit himself and his tricks. Such
was Mr. Tuft, a great friend and admirer of "the marquis," through whose
influence he had procured the invitation from Titmouse, in virtue of
which he was now dressing in a nice little room at the back of the Hall,
overlooking the stables; being bent upon improving his already tolerably
familiar acquaintance with the Earl of Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia,
and also extracting from the man whose hospitality he was enjoying,
materials for merriment among his great friends against the next season.

When the party had collected in the drawing-room in readiness for
dinner, you might have seen Mr. Tuft in earnestly respectful
conversation with the Lady Cecilia; Mr. Gammon standing talking to Miss
Macspleuchan, with an air of courteous ease and frankness--having
observed her sitting neglected by everybody; the earl conversing now
with the marquis, then with Titmouse, and anon with Tuft, with whom he
appeared to be particularly pleased. Happening at length to be standing
near Gammon--a calm, gentlemanlike person of whom he knew nothing, nor
suspected that his keen eye had taken in his Lordship's true character
and capacity at a glance; nor that he would, in a few hours' time,
acquire as complete a mastery over his said Lordship, as ever the
present famous _hippodamist_ at Windsor,[25] by touching a nerve in the
mouth of a horse, reduces him to helpless docility and submission--the
earl and he fell into casual conversation for a moment or two. The air
of deference with which Gammon received the slight advances of the great
man, was exquisite and indescribable. It gave him clearly to understand
that his lofty pretensions were known to, and profoundly appreciated by,
the individual whom he was addressing. Gammon said but little: that
little, however, how significant and decisive! He knew that the earl
would presently inquire of Titmouse who the unknown visitor was; and
that on being told, in the conceited and probably disparaging manner
which Gammon knew Titmouse would adopt, if he supposed it would please
the earl, that "it was only Mr. Gammon, one of his solicitors," he would
sink at once and forever beneath the notice of the earl. He resolved,
therefore, to anticipate--to contrive that it should ooze out easily and
advantageously from himself, so that he could see the effect it had upon
the earl, and regulate his movements accordingly. Gammon sat down before
the fortress of the earl's pride, resolved that, for all it appeared so
inaccessible and impregnable, it should fall, however his skill and
patience might be taxed in the siege. Till he had cast his piercing eye
upon the earl, Gammon had felt a little of the nervousness which one may
imagine would be experienced by Van Amburgh, who, on being called into
the presence of majesty to give a specimen of his skill upon an animal
concealed from him, of whose name and qualities he was ignorant--should
summon all his terrors into his eye, and string his muscles to their
highest tension; and, on the door being opened, turn with smiling
scorn--if not indignation--from a sucking pig, a calf, an ass, or a
chicken. Something similar were the feelings experienced by Gammon, as
soon as he had scanned the countenance and figure of the Earl of
Dreddlington. He quickly perceived that the dash of awe which he had
thrown into his manner was producing its due effect upon that most
magnificent simpleton. Watching his opportunity, he gently introduced
the topic of the recent change of ownership which Yatton had undergone;
and in speaking of the manner in which Mr. Titmouse had borne his sudden
prosperity--"Yes, my Lord," continued Gammon, with apparent
carelessness, "I recollect making some such observation to him, and he
replied, 'Very true, _Mr. Gammon_'"--Gammon finished his sentence
calmly; but he perceived that the earl had withdrawn himself into his
earldom. He had given a very slight start; a little color had mounted
into his cheek; a sensible hauteur had been assumed, and by the time
that Gammon had done speaking, the space between them had been--as Lord
Dreddlington imagined, unobservedly--increased by two or three inches.
Gammon was a _man_--an able and a proud man--and he felt galled; but,
"let it pass," he presently reflected--"let it pass, you pompous old
idiot; I will one day repay it with interest." The earl separated from
him, Gammon regarding him as a gaudy craft sheering off for a while, but
doomed to be soon sunk. Mr. Tuft, (who was the son of a respectable
retired tobacconist,) having ascertained that Gammon was only Mr.
Titmouse's attorney, conducted himself for a while as though there were
no such person in the room; but being a quick observer, and catching
once or twice the faint sarcastic smile with which Gammon's eye was
settled on him, he experienced a very galling and uneasy consciousness
of his presence. The marquis's superior tact and perception of character
led him to treat Gammon very differently--with a deference and anxiety
to please him, which Gammon understood thoroughly--in fact, he and the
marquis had many qualities in common, but Gammon was the man of _power_.
During dinner he sat beside Miss Macspleuchan, and was almost the only
person who spoke to her--in fact, he said but little to any one else. He
took wine with Titmouse with a marked, but guarded, air of _confidence_.
The marquis took wine with Gammon with an air of studied courtesy. The
earl's attention was almost entirely engrossed by Mr. Tuft, who sat next
to him, chattering in his ear like a little magpie perched upon his
shoulder. The marquis sat next to the Lady Cecilia; for whose amusement,
as far as his cautious tact would allow him, he from time to time drew
out their little host. At length, in answer to a question by the
marquis, the earl let fall some pompous observation, from which the
marquis, who was getting very tired of the vapid monotony which pervaded
the table, ventured to differ pretty decisively. Tuft instantly sided
with the earl, and spoke with infinite fluency for some minutes: Gammon
saw in a moment that he was an absurd pretender; and watching his
opportunity, for the first time that he had interchanged a syllable with
him, with one word exposing a palpable historical blunder of poor
Tuft's, overthrew him as completely as a bullet from a crossbow
dislodges a tomtit from the wall on which he is hopping about,
unconscious of his danger. 'Twas a thing that there could be no mistake
about whatever.

"That's a _settler_, Tuft," said the marquis, after a pause: Tuft
reddened violently, and gulped down a glass of wine; and presently, with
the slightly staggered earl, became a silent listener to the discussion
into which the marquis and Gammon had entered. Obtuse as was the earl,
Gammon contrived to let him see how effectually he was supporting his
Lordship's opinion, which Mr. Tuft had so ridiculously failed in. The
marquis got slightly the worst of the encounter with Gammon, whose
object he saw, and whose tact he admired; and with much judgment
permitted Gammon to appear to the earl as his successful defender, in
order that he might himself make a friend of Gammon. Moreover, he was
not at all annoyed at witnessing the complete and unexpected
discomfiture of poor Tuft, whom, for all his intimacy with that
gentleman, the marquis thoroughly despised.

However it might possibly be that his grand visitors enjoyed themselves,
it was far otherwise with Mr. Titmouse; who, being compelled to keep
sober, was quite miserable. None of those around him were drinking
men:--and the consequence was, that he would retire early to his
bedroom, and amuse himself with brandy and water, and cigars, leaving
his guests to amuse themselves with cards, billiards, or otherwise, as
best they might. He did, indeed, "stand like a cipher in the great
account;" instead of feeling himself the Earl of Dreddlington's host, he
felt himself as one of his Lordship's inferior guests, struggling in
vain against the freezing state and etiquette which the earl carried
with him wherever he went, like a sort of atmosphere. In this extremity
he secretly clung to Gammon, and reposed upon his powerful support and
sympathy more implicitly than ever he had done before. As the shooting
season had commenced, and game was plentiful at Yatton, the marquis and
Tuft found full occupation during the day, as occasionally did Mr.
Gammon. Mr. Titmouse once accompanied them; but having contrived very
nearly to blow his own hand off, and also to blow out the eyes of the
marquis, it was intimated to him that he had better go out alone for
the future--as he did accordingly, but soon got tired of such solitary
sport. Besides--hares, pheasants, partridges--old and young, cock or
hen--'twas all one--none of them seemed to care one straw for him or his
gun, let him pop and blaze away as loud and as long, as near or as far
off, as he liked. The only thing he hit--and that plump--was one of his
unfortunate dogs, which he killed on the spot; and then coming up with
it, stamped upon the poor creature's bleeding carcass, saying with a
furious oath--"Why didn't you keep out of the way, then, you brute?"

The earl was really anxious to perform his promise of introducing, or
procuring introduction for Titmouse, to the leading nobility and gentry
of the county; but it proved a more difficult task than his Lordship had
anticipated--for Titmouse's early doings at Yatton had not yet been
forgotten. Some of the haughty Whig gentry joined with their Tory
neighbors in manifesting their open contempt and dislike, for one who
could so disgrace the name and station to which he had been elevated
in the county; and the earl had to encounter one or two somewhat
mortifying rebuffs, in the course of his efforts for the establishment
of his young kinsman. There were some, however, whom mere political
considerations--others, whom deference for the earl's rank, and
unwillingness to hurt his feelings--induced to receive the new Squire of
Yatton on a footing of formal intimacy and equality; so that his
Lordship's dignified exertions were not entirely useless. The whole
party at the Hall attended the earl to church on the Sundays--entirely
filling the squire's pew and the adjoining one; their decorous conduct
presenting a very edifying spectacle to the humble congregation, and
suggesting a striking contrast between the present, and the former,
visitors of Mr. Titmouse. Worthy Dr. Tatham was asked several times to
dinner, at the earl's instance; by whom he was treated on such occasions
with great, though stately, courtesy. The only persons with whom the
little doctor felt at his ease, were Mr. Gammon and Miss Macspleuchan,
who treated him with the utmost cordiality and respect. What became
during the day of the two ladies, I hardly know. There was no instrument
at Yatton: bagatelle-board, and novels from a circulating library at
York, frequent rides and drives through the grounds and about the
country, and occasional visits to and from one or two families with whom
Lady Cecilia had a town acquaintance, occupied their day; and in the
evening, a rubber at whist, or écarté, with the earl--sometimes, too,
with the marquis and Mr. Tuft, both of whom lost no opportunity of
paying marked attention to Lady Cecilia, with a view of dissipating as
far as possible the inevitable ennui of her situation--would while away
the short evenings, very early hours being now kept at the Hall. 'Twas
wonderful that two such men as the marquis and Mr. Tuft could stay so
long as they did at so very dull a place, and with such dull people.
Inwardly they both voted the earl an insufferable old twaddler; his
daughter a piece of languid insipidity; and one would have thought it
daily more irksome for them to keep up their courtly attentions. They
had, however, as may presently be seen, objects of their own in view.

As Gammon, a little to the earl's surprise, continued apparently a
permanent guest at the Hall, where he seemed ever engaged in
superintending and getting into order the important affairs of Mr.
Titmouse, it could hardly be but that he and the earl should be
occasionally thrown together; for as the earl did not shoot, and never
read books, even had there been any to read, he had little to do, when
not engaged upon the expeditions I have alluded to, but saunter about
the house and grounds, and enter into frivolous, but solemn and formal
conversation with almost any one he met. The assistance which Gammon had
rendered the earl on the occasion of their first meeting at dinner, had
not been forgotten by his Lordship, but had served to take off the edge
from his preconceived contemptuous dislike for that gentleman. Gammon,
however, steadily kept in the background, resolved that all advances
should come from the earl. When, once or twice, his Lordship inquired,
with what Gammon saw to be only an affected carelessness, into the state
of Mr. Titmouse's affairs, Mr. Gammon evinced a courteous readiness to
give him _general_ information; but with an evident caution and anxiety,
not unduly to expose, even to the earl--to Mr. Titmouse's distinguished
kinsman, the state of his property. He would, however, disclose
sufficient to demonstrate his zeal and ability on behalf of Mr.
Titmouse's interests, his consummate qualifications as a man of
business; and from time to time perceived that his display was not lost
upon the earl. Mr. Gammon's anxiety, in particular, to prevent the
borough of Yatton from being a second time wrested out of the hands of
its proprietor, and returning, by a corrupt and profligate arrangement
with Ministers, a Tory to Parliament, gave the earl peculiar
satisfaction. He was led by the mention of this topic into a long
conversation with Mr. Gammon upon political matters; and, at its close,
was greatly struck with the soundness of his views, the decision and
strength of his liberal opinions, and the vigor and acuteness with which
he had throughout agreed with everything the earl had said, and
fortified every position he had taken; evincing, at the same time, a
profound appreciation of his Lordship's luminous exposition of political
principles. The earl was forced to own to himself, that he had never
before met with a man of Mr. Gammon's strength of intellect, whose
views and opinions had so intimately and entirely coincided--were,
indeed, identical with his own. 'Twas delightful to witness them upon
these occasions--to observe the air of reverence and admiration with
which Gammon listened to the lessons of political wisdom which fell,
with increasing length and frequency, from the lips of his Lordship.

     "[Greek: Tou kai apo glôssês melitos glukiôn reen authê.]"

Nor was it only when they were alone together, that Gammon would thus
sit at the feet of Gamaliel; he was not ashamed to do so openly at the
dinner-table; but, ah! how delicately and dexterously did he conceal
from the spectators the game he was playing--more difficult to do so,
though it daily became--because, the more willing Gammon was to receive,
the more eager the earl was to communicate instruction! If, on any of
these occasions, oppressed by the multifariousness of his knowledge, and
its sudden overpowering confluence, he would pause in the midst of a
little series of half-formed sentences, Gammon would be, at hand, to
glide in easily, and finish what the earl had begun, out of the earl's
ample and rich materials, of which Gammon had caught a glimpse, and only
worked out the earl's own, somewhat numerous, half-formed illustrations.
The marquis and Mr. Tuft began, however, at length to feel a little
impatient at observing the _way_ which Gammon was making with the earl;
but of what use was it for them to interfere? Gammon was an exceedingly
awkward person to meddle with; for having once got fair play, by gaining
the earl's ear, his accuracy, readiness, extent of information upon
political topics, and admirable temper, told very powerfully against his
two opponents, who at length interfered less and less with him; the
marquis only _feeling_ pique, but Tuft also _showing_ it. Had it been
otherwise, indeed, with the latter gentleman, it would have been odd;
for Gammon seemed to feel a peculiar pleasure in demolishing him. The
marquis, however, once resolved to show Gammon how distinctly he
perceived his plan of operations, by waiting till he had accompanied the
poor earl up to a climax of absurdity; and then, with his eye on Gammon,
bursting into laughter. Seldom had Gammon been more ruffled than by that
well-timed laugh; for he felt _found out_!

When the earl and his astute companion were alone, the latter would
listen with lively interest, over and over again, never wearied, to his
Lordship's magnificent accounts of what he had intended to do, had he
only continued in office, in the important department over which he had
presided, viz. the Board of Green Cloth; and more than once put his
Lordship into a soft flutter of excitement, by hinting at rumors which,
he said, were rife--that in the event of a change of ministers, which
was looked for, his Lordship was to be President of the Council. "Sir,"
the earl would say, "I should not shrink from the performance of my duty
to my sovereign, to whatever post he might be pleased to call me. The
one you mention, sir, has its peculiar difficulties; and if I know
anything of myself, sir, it is one for which--I should say--I am
peculiarly qualified. Sir, the duty of presiding over the deliberations
of powerful minds, requires signal discretion and dignity, because, in
short, especially in affairs of state--Do you comprehend me, Mr.
Gammon?"

"I understand your Lordship to say, that where the occasion is one of
such magnitude, and the disturbing forces are upon so vast a scale, to
moderate and guide conflicting interests and opinions"----

"Sir, it _is_ so; _tantas componere lites, hic labor, hoc opus_,"
interrupted the earl, with a desperate attempt to fish up a fragment or
two of his early scholarship; and his features wore for a moment a
solemn commanding expression, which satisfied Gammon of the sway which
his Lordship would have had when presiding at the council-board. Gammon
would also occasionally introduce the subject of heraldry, asking many
anxious questions concerning that exalted science, and also respecting
the genealogies of leading members of the peerage, with which he safely
presumed that the earl would be, as also he proved, perfectly familiar;
and his Lordship would go on for an hour at once upon these interesting
and most instructive subjects.

Shortly after luncheon one day, of which only Gammon, the earl, and the
two ladies, were in the Hall to partake, Mr. Gammon had occasion to
enter the drawing-room, where he found the earl sitting upon the sofa,
with his massive gold spectacles on, leaning over the table, engaged in
the perusal of a portion of a work then in course of periodical
publication, and which had only that morning been delivered at the Hall.
The earl asked Gammon if he had seen it, and was answered in the
negative.

"Sir," said the earl, rising and removing his glasses, "it is a
remarkably interesting publication, showing considerable knowledge of a
very difficult and all-important subject, and one, in respect of which
the lower orders of the people in this country--nay, I lament to be
obliged to add, the great bulk of the middle classes also, are wofully
deficient--I mean heraldry, and the history of the origin, progress, and
present state of the families of the old nobility and gentry of this
country." The work which had been so fortunate as thus to meet with the
approbation of the earl, was the last monthly number of a History of the
County of York, of which, as yet, only thirty-eight seven-and-sixpenny
quarto numbers had made their appearance. It formed an admirable and
instructive publication, every number of which had contained a
glorification of some different Yorkshire family. The discriminating
patronage of Mr. Titmouse for this inestimable performance, had been
secured by a most obsequious letter from the learned editor, but more
especially by a device of his in the last number, which it would have
been strange indeed if it could have failed to catch the eye, and
interest the feelings of the new aristocratical owner of Yatton.
Opposite to an engraving of the Hall, was placed a magnificent
genealogical tree, surmounted by a many-quartered shield of armorial
bearings, both of which purported to be an accurate record of the
ancestral glories of the house of "TITMOUSE of YATTON!" A minute
investigation might indeed have detected that the recent flight of
_Titmice_ which were perched on the lower branches of this imposing
pedigree, bore nearly as small a proportion to the long array of
chivalrous Drelincourts and Dreddlingtons which constituted the massive
trunk, as did the paternal coat[26] (to which the profound research and
ingenuity of Sir GORGEOUS TINTACK, the Garter king-at-arms, had
succeeded in demonstrating the inalienable right of Titmouse) to the
interminable series of quarterings, derived from the same source, which
occupied the remainder of the escutcheon. At these mysteriously
significant symbols, however, Mr. Titmouse, though quite ready to
believe that they indicated some just cause or other of family pride,
had looked with the same appreciating intelligence which you may fancy
you see a chicken displaying, while hesitatingly clapping its foot upon,
and quaintly cocking its eye at, a slip of paper lying in a yard,
covered over with algebraic characters and calculations. Far otherwise,
however, was it with the earl, in whose eyes the complex and recondite
character of the production infinitely enhanced its value, and struck in
his bosom several deep chords of genealogical feeling, as he proceeded,
in answer to various anxious inquiries of Gammon, to give him a very
full and minute account of the unrivalled splendor and antiquity of his
Lordship's ancestry. Now be it understood that Gammon--while prosecuting
the researches which had preceded the elevation of Mr. Titmouse to that
rank and fortune of which the united voice of the fashionable world had
now pronounced him so eminently worthy--had made himself pretty well
acquainted with the previous history and connections of that ancient and
illustrious house, of which the Earl of Dreddlington was the head; and
his familiarity with this topic, though it did not _surprise_ the earl,
because he conceived it to be every one's duty to acquaint himself with
such momentous matters, rapidly raised Gammon in the good opinion of his
Lordship; to whom at length, it occurred to view him in quite a new
light; viz. as the chosen instrument by whose means (under Providence)
the perverse and self-willed Aubrey had been righteously cast down from
that high place, which his rebellious opposition to the wishes and
political views of his liege lord had rendered him unworthy to occupy;
while a more loyal branch had been raised from obscurity to his
forfeited rank and estates. In fact, the earl began to look upon Gammon
as one, whose just regard for his Lordship's transcendent position in
the aristocracy of England had led even to anticipate his Lordship's
possible wishes; and proceeded accordingly to rivet this spontaneous
allegiance, by discoursing with the most condescending affability on the
successive noble and princely alliances which had, during a long series
of generations, refined the ancient blood of the Drelincourts into the
sort of super-sublimated ichor which at present flowed in his own veins.
The progress of the earl's feelings was watched with the greatest
interest by Mr. Gammon, who perceived the increasing extent to which
respect for him was mingling with his Lordship's sublime
self-satisfaction; and, watching the opportunity, struck a spark into
the dry tinder of his Lordship's vain imagination, blew it gently--and
saw that it caught and spread. Confident in his knowledge of the state
of affairs, and that his Lordship had reached the highest point of
credulity, Gammon had the almost incredible audacity to intimate, in a
hesitating but highly significant manner, his impression, that the
recent failure in the male line of the princely house of
HOCH-STIFFELHAUSEN NARRENSTEIN DUMMLEINBERG[27] had placed his Lordship,
in right of the marriage of one of his ancestors, during the Thirty
Years' War, with a princess of that august line, in a situation to
claim, if such should be his Lordship's pleasure, the dormant honors and
sovereign rank attached to the possession of that important
principality. The earl appeared for a few moments transfixed with awe!
The bare possibility of such an event seemed too much for him to
realize; but when further conversation with Gammon had familiarized his
Lordship with the notion, his mind's eye involuntarily and naturally
glanced to his old rival, the Earl of Fitz-Walter: what would _he_ say
to all this? How would _his_ little honors pale beside the splendors of
his Serene Highness the Prince of Hoch-Stiffelhausen Narrenstein
Dummleinberg! He was not sorry when Mr. Gammon, soon afterwards, left
him to follow out unrestrainedly the swelling current of his thoughts,
and yield himself up to the transporting ecstasies of anticipated
sovereignty. To such a pitch did his excitement carry him, that he might
shortly afterwards have been seen walking up and down the Elm Avenue,
with the feelings and air of an old KING.

Not satisfied, however, with the success of his daring experiment upon
the credulity and inflammable imagination of the aspiring old
nobleman--whom his suggestion had set upon instituting extensive
inquiries into the position of the Dreddlington family with reference
to the foreign alliances which it had formed in times past, and of which
so dazzling an incident might really be in existence--it occurred to Mr.
Gammon, on another occasion of his being left alone with the earl, and
who, he saw, was growing manifestly more pleased with the frequent
recurrence of them, to sink a shaft into a new mine. He therefore, on
mere speculation, introduced, as a subject of casual conversation, the
imprudence of persons of rank and large fortune devolving the management
of their pecuniary affairs so entirely upon others--and thus leaving
themselves exposed to all the serious consequences of employing
incompetent, indolent, or mercenary agents. Mr. Gammon proceeded to
observe that he had recently known an instance of a distinguished
nobleman, (whose name--oh, Gammon!--he for very obvious reasons
suppressed,) who, having occasion to raise a large sum of money by way
of mortgage, left the sole negotiation of the affair to an agent, who
was afterwards proved to have been in league with the lender, (the
mortgagee,) and had permitted his employer to pay, for ten or twelve
years, an excess of interest over that for which he might, had he
chosen, have obtained the requisite loan, which actually made a
difference in the distinguished borrower's income of a thousand a-year!
Here, looking out of the northeast corner of his eye, the placid
speaker, continuing unmoved, observed the earl start a little, glance
somewhat anxiously at him, but in silence, and slightly quicken the pace
at which he had been walking. Gammon presently added, in a careless sort
of way, that accident had brought him into professional intercourse with
that nobleman--[Oh, Gammon! Gammon!]--whom he was ultimately
instrumental in saving from the annual robbery which was being inflicted
upon him. It was enough; Gammon saw that what he had been saying had
sunk like lead into the mind of his noble and acute companion, who, for
the rest of the day, seemed burdened and oppressed with either it or
some other cause of anxiety; and, from an occasional uneasy and wistful
eye which the earl fixed upon him at dinner, he felt conscious that not
long would elapse, before he should hear something from the earl
connected with the topic in question--and he was not mistaken. The very
next day they met in the park; and after one or two casual observations,
the earl remarked that, by the way, with reference to their yesterday's
conversation, it "_did so happen_"--very singularly--that the earl had a
friend who was placed in a situation very similar to that which had been
mentioned by Mr. Gammon to the earl; it was a _very intimate_
friend--and therefore the earl would like to hear what was Mr. Gammon's
opinion of the case. Gammon was scarcely able to refrain from a smile,
as the earl went on, evincing every moment a more vivid interest in
behalf of his mysterious "_friend_," who at last stood suddenly
confessed as the Earl of Dreddlington himself; for in answer to a
question of Mr. Gammon, his Lordship unwittingly spoke _in the first
person_! On perceiving this, he got much confused; but Gammon passed it
off very easily; and by his earnest confidential tone and manner, soon
soothed and reconciled the earl to the vexatious disclosure he had
made--vexatious only because the earl had thought fit, so very
unnecessarily, to make a mystery of an everyday matter. He rather
loftily enjoined Mr. Gammon to secrecy upon the subject, to which Gammon
readily pledged himself, and then they entered upon an unrestrained
discussion of the matter. Suffice it to say, that in the end Gammon
assured the earl that he would, without any difficulty, undertake to
procure a transfer of the mortgage at present existing on his Lordship's
property, which should lower his annual payments by at least one and a
half per cent: and which, on a rough calculation, would make a
difference of very nearly five hundred a-year in the earl's favor. But
Gammon explicitly informed the earl that he was not to suppose that he
had been overreached, or his interests been in any way neglected, in the
original transaction; that it had been conducted on his Lordship's
behalf, by his solicitor, Mr. Mudge, one of the most respectable men in
the profession; and that a few years made all the difference in matters
of this description; and before he, Mr. Gammon, would interfere any
further in the business, he requested his Lordship to write to Mr.
Mudge, enclosing a draft of the arrangement proposed by Mr. Gammon, and
desiring Mr. Mudge to say what he thought of it. This the earl did; and
in a few days' time received an answer from Mr. Mudge, to the effect
that he was happy that there was a prospect of so favorable an
arrangement as that proposed, to which he could see no objection
whatever; and would co-operate with Mr. Gammon in any way, and at any
time, which his Lordship might point out. Mr. Gammon was, in fact,
rendering here a real and very important service to the earl; being an
able, acute, and energetic man of business--while Mr. Mudge was very
nearly superannuated--had grown rich and indolent, no longer attending
to his practice with pristine energy; but _pottering_ and dozing over
it, as it were, from day to day; unable, from his antiquated style of
doing business, and the constantly narrowing circle of his connections,
to avail himself of those resources which were open to younger and more
energetic practitioners, with more varied resources. Thus, though money
was now much more plentiful, and consequently to be got for a less sum
than when, some ten years before, the earl had been compelled to borrow
to a large amount upon mortgage, old Mr. Mudge had suffered matters to
remain all the while as they were; and so they _would_ have remained,
but for Gammon's accidental interference: the earl being not a man of
business--one who could not bear to allude to the fact of his property
being mortgaged--who did not like even to _think_ of it; and concluded
that good old Mr. Mudge kept a sufficiently sharp eye upon his noble
client's interest. The earl gave Mr. Mudge's letter to Mr. Gammon, and
requested him to lose no time in putting himself into communication with
Mr. Mudge, for the purpose of effecting the suggested transfer. This
Gammon undertook to do; and perceiving that he had fortunately made so
strong a lodgement in the earl's good opinion, whose interests now bound
him, in a measure, to Mr. Gammon, that gentleman thought that he might
safely quit Yatton and return to town, in order to attend to divers
matters of pressing exigency. Before his departure, however, he had a
very long interview with Titmouse, in the course of which he gave that
now submissive personage a few simple, perspicuous, and decisive
directions, as to the line of conduct he was to pursue, and which alone
could conduce to his permanent interests: enjoining him, moreover, to
pursue that line, on terror of the consequences of failing to do so. The
Earl of Dreddlington, in taking leave of Mr. Gammon, evinced the utmost
degree of cordiality consistent with the stateliness of his demeanor. He
felt, in fact, real regret at parting with a man of such superior
intellect--one evincing such a fascinating deference towards himself,
(the earl:) and it glanced across his Lordship's mind, that such a man
as Mr. Gammon would be the very fittest man who could be thought of, in
respect of tact, energy, and knowledge, to become prime minister to--his
Serene Highness the Prince of Hoch-Stiffelhausen Narrenstein
Dummleinberg!

The longer that the earl continued at Yatton--in which he could not
have more thoroughly established himself if he had in the ordinary way
engaged it for the autumn--the more he was struck with its beauties; and
the oftener they presented themselves to his mind's eye, the keener
became his regrets at the split in the family interests which had so
long existed, and his desire to take advantage of what seemed almost an
opportunity, specially afforded by Providence, for reuniting them. As
the earl took his solitary walks, he thought with deep anxiety of his
own advanced age, and sensibly increasing feebleness. The position of
his affairs was not satisfactory. When he died, he would leave behind
him an only child--and that a daughter--on whom would devolve the
splendid responsibility of sustaining, alone, the honors of her ancient
family. Then there was his newly discovered kinsman, Mr. Titmouse, sole
and unembarrassed proprietor of this fine old family property;
simple-minded and confiding, with a truly reverential feeling towards
them, the heads of the family; also the undoubted, undisputed proprietor
of the borough of Yatton; who entertained and avowed the same liberal
and enlightened political opinions, which the earl had ever maintained
with dignified consistency and determination; and who, by a rare
conjunction of personal merit and of circumstance, had been elevated to
an unprecedented pitch of popularity, in the highest regions of society;
and who was, moreover, already next in succession, after himself and the
Lady Cecilia, to the ancient barony of Drelincourt and the estates
annexed to it. How little was there, in reality, to set against all
this? An eccentricity of manner, for which nature only, if any one, was
to blame; a tendency to extreme modishness in dress, and a slight
deficiency in the knowledge of the etiquette of society, but which daily
experience and intercourse were rapidly supplying; and a slight
disposition towards the pleasures of the table, which no doubt would
disappear on the instant of his having an object of permanent and
elevating attachment. Such was Mr. Titmouse. He had as yet, undoubtedly,
made no advances to Lady Cecilia, nor evinced any disposition to do so,
though numerous and favorable had been, and continued to be, the
opportunities for his doing so. Might not this, however, be set down
entirely to the score of his excessive diffidence--distrust of his
pretensions to aspire after so august an alliance as that with the Lady
Cecilia? Yet there certainly was another way of accounting for his
conduct: had he got already entangled with an attachment elsewhere?--Run
after in society, as he had been, in a manner totally unprecedented
during his very first season--had his affections been inveigled?--When
the earl dwelt upon this dismal possibility, if it were when he was
lying awake in bed, he would be seized with a fit of intolerable
restlessness--and getting up, wrap himself in his dressing-gown, and
pace his chamber for an hour together, running over, in his mind, the
names of all the women he knew who would be likely to lay snares for
Titmouse, in order to secure him for a daughter. Then there was the Lady
Cecilia--but she, he knew, would not run counter to his wishes, and he
had, therefore, no difficulty to apprehend on _that_ score. She had ever
been calmly submissive to his will; had the same lofty sense of family
dignity that he enjoyed; and had often concurred in his deep regrets on
account of the separation of the family interests. She was still
unmarried--and yet, on her father's decease, would be a peeress in her
own right, and possessed of the family estates. The fastidiousness which
alone, thought the earl, had kept her hitherto single, would not, he
felt persuaded, be allowed by her to interfere, for the purpose of
preventing so excellent a family arrangement as would be effected by her
union with Titmouse. Once married--and being secured suitable
settlements from Titmouse--if there should prove to be any
incompatibility of temper or discrepancy of disposition, come the worst
to the worst, there was the shelter of a separation and separate
maintenance to look to; a thing which was becoming of daily
occurrence--which implied no real reproach to either party--and left
them always at liberty to return to each other's society--when so
disposed. And as for the dress and manners of Titmouse, granting them to
be a little extravagant, would not, in all probability, a word from her
suffice to dispel his fantastic vulgarity--to elevate him into a
gentleman? Thus thought her fond and enlightened parent, and thus--in
point of fact--thought also she; from which it is evident, that
Titmouse, once brought to the point--made sensible where his duty and
his privilege converged--it would be a straightforward plain-sailing
business. To bring about so desirable a state of things as this--to give
the young people an opportunity of thoroughly knowing and endearing
themselves to each other, were among the objects which the earl had
proposed to himself, in accepting the invitation to Yatton. Time was
wearing on, however, and yet no decisive step had been taken. Lady
Cecilia's icy coldness--her petrifying indifference of manner, her
phlegmatic temperament and lofty pride, were qualities, all of which
were calculated rather to check than encourage the advances of a suitor,
especially of such an one as Titmouse; but, though the earl did not know
it, there were others whose ardor and impatience to possess themselves
of such superior loveliness, could not be similarly restrained or
discouraged. Will not the reader find it difficult to believe, that Mr.
Venom Tuft, having been long on the look-out for--Heaven save the
mark!--an aristocratic wife, had conceived it not impossible to engage
the affections of Lady Cecilia--to fascinate her by the display of his
brilliant acquirements; and that the comparative seclusion of Yatton
would afford him the requisite opportunity for effecting his wishes? Yet
even so it really was: intoxicated with vanity, which led him to believe
himself peculiarly agreeable to women, he at length had the
inconceivable folly and presumption, on the morning after an evening in
which he fancied that he had displayed peculiar brilliance, to intimate
to her that his affections were no longer under his own control, having
been taken captive by her irresistible charms. Vain thought! as well
might a cock-sparrow have sought to mate himself with the stately swan!
It was for some time rather difficult for the Lady Cecilia to understand
that he was seriously making her a proposal. At length, however, she
comprehended him: evincing the utmost degree of astonishment which her
drooping eyelids and languid hauteur of manner would permit her to
manifest. When poor Tuft found that such was the case, his face burned
like fire, and he felt in a fierce fluster within.

"You haven't mistaken me for Miss Macspleuchan, Mr. Tuft, have you?"
said Lady Cecilia, with a faint smile. "You and Mr. Titmouse and the
marquis, I hear, sat much longer after dinner last night than usual!"
Tuft was utterly confounded. Was her Ladyship insinuating that he was
under the influence of wine? He was for a while speechless.

"I assure you, Lady Cecilia"----at length stammered he.

"Oh--now I understand!--You are rehearsing for Lady Tawdry's private
theatricals? Do you play there next month? Well, I dare say you'll make
a delicious Romeo." Here the earl happening to enter, Lady Cecilia, with
a languid smile, apprised him that Mr. Tuft had been rehearsing, to
admiration, a love-scene which he was studying for Lady Tawdry's
theatricals; on which the earl, in a good-natured way, said that he
should like to witness it, if not too much trouble to Mr. Tuft. If that
gentleman could have crept up the chimney without being observed, he
would have employed the first moment of sooty repose and security, in
praying that the Lady Cecilia might bring herself to believe, that he
had really been doing what at present he feared she only affected to
believe, viz. that he had been only playing at love-making. He resolved
to outstay the earl, who, indeed, withdrew in a few minutes' time,
having entered only for the purpose of asking Lady Cecilia a question;
and on her Ladyship and her would-be lover being again alone--

"If I have been guilty of presumption, Lady Cecilia"----commenced Tuft,
with tremulous earnestness, looking a truly piteous object.

"Not the least, Mr. Tuft," said she, calmly smiling; "or, even if you
_have_, I'll forgive it on one condition"----

"Your Ladyship has only to intimate"----

"That you will go through it all with Miss Macspleuchan; or, couldn't we
get up a sweet scene with my maid? Annette is a pretty little thing, and
her broken English"----

"Your Ladyship is pleased to be exceedingly severe; but I feel that I
deserve it. Still, knowing your Ladyship's good-nature, I will venture
to ask one great favor, which, if you refuse, I will within an hour quit
Yatton; that your Ladyship will, in mercy to my feelings, mention this
little scene to no one."

"If you wish it, Mr. Tuft, I will preserve your secret," she replied in
a kinder and more serious manner than he had ever witnessed in her; and,
when he had escaped into solitude, he could hardly tell whom he hated
most--himself, or the Lady Cecilia. Several days afterwards, the Marquis
Gants-Jaunes de Millefleurs, purposing to quit Yatton on his way
northward, sought a favorable opportunity to lay himself--the
brilliant, irresistible marquis--at the feet of the all-conquering Lady
Cecilia, the future Lady Drelincourt, peeress in her own right, and
mistress of the family estates. He had done the same kind of thing half
a dozen times to as many women--all of them of ample fortune, and most
of them also of rank. His manner was exquisitely delicate and winning;
but Lady Cecilia, with a slight blush, (for she was really pleased,)
calmly refused him. He saw it was utterly in vain; and for a few moments
felt in an unutterably foolish position. Quickly recovering himself,
however, he assumed an air of delicate raillery, and put her into such
good humor, that, forgetful in the moment of her promise to poor Tuft,
she, in the "strictest confidence in the world," communicated to the
marquis the offer which Mr. Tuft had been beforehand with him in making
to her! The marquis's cheek flushed and tingled; and, without being able
to analyze what passed through his mind, the result may be stated as an
intolerable feeling, that he and Tuft were a couple of sneaking
adventurers, and worse--of ridiculous and exposed adventurers. For
almost the first time in his life, he felt such an embarrassment amid
the momentary conflict of his thoughts and feelings, as kept him silent.
At length, "I presume, Lady Cecilia," said he, in a low tone, with an
air of distress, and a glance which did more in his behalf with Lady
Cecilia than a thousand of his most flattering and eloquent speeches,
"that I shall, in like manner, afford amusement to your Ladyship and Mr.
Tuft?"

"Sir," said she, haughtily, and coloring--"Mr. Tuft and the Marquis
Gants-Jaunes de Millefleurs, are two very different persons. I am
surprised, Monsieur le Marquis, that you should have made such an
observation!"

Hereupon he felt greatly consoled, and perfectly secure against being
exposed to Tuft, as Tuft had been exposed to him. Yet he was mistaken.
How can the reader forgive Lady Cecilia for her double breach of
promise, when he is informed, that only a day or two afterwards, Tuft
and she being thrown together, partly out of pity to her rejected and
bitterly mortified suitor, partly from an impulse of womanly vanity, and
partly from a sort of glimpse of even-handed justice requiring such a
step, as a kind of reparation to Tuft for her exposure of him to the
marquis--she ("in the strictest confidence," however) informed him that
his example had been followed by the marquis; utterly forgetful of that
excellent maxim, "begin nothing of which you have not well considered
the end." It had not occurred to her Ladyship as being a thing almost
certain to ensue upon her breach of faith, that Tuft would ask her
whether she had violated _his_ confidence. He did so: she blushed
scarlet--and though, like her august papa, she could have _equivocated_
when she could not have _lied_, here she was in a dilemma from which
nothing but a fib could possibly extricate her; and in a confident tone,
but with a burning cheek, she told a falsehood, and had, moreover, the
pain of being conscious, by Mr. Tuft's look, that he did not believe
her.--Nothing could exceed the comical air of embarrassment of the
marquis and Mr. Tuft, whenever, after this, they were alone together!
How fearful lest--how doubtful whether--each knew as much as the other!

To return, however, to the Earl of Dreddlington, (who was utterly in
ignorance of the marquis and Mr. Tuft's proposals to Lady Cecilia,) the
difficulty which at present harassed his Lordship was, how he could,
without compromising his own dignity, or injuring his darling scheme by
a premature development of his purpose, sound Titmouse upon the subject.
How to break the ice--to broach the affair--was the great problem which
the earl turned over and over again in his mind. Now, be it observed,
that when a muddle-headed man is called upon at length _to act_--however
long beforehand he may have had notice of it--however assured he may
have been of the necessity for eventually taking one course or another,
and consequently, however ample the opportunity had for consideration,
he remains confused and irresolute up to the very _last instant_--when
he acts, after all, merely as the creature of caprice and impulse! 'Twas
thus with Lord Dreddlington. He had thought of half a dozen different
ways of commencing with Titmouse, and decided upon adopting each; yet,
on the arrival of the anxiously looked for moment, he had lost sight of
them all, in his inward fluster and nervousness.

'Twas noon, and Titmouse, smoking a cigar, was walking slowly up and
down, his hands stuck into his surtout pockets, and resting on his hips,
in the fir-tree walk at the end of the garden--the spot to which he
seemed, during the stay of his grand guests, to have been tacitly
restricted for the enjoyment of the luxury in question. As soon as
Titmouse was aware of the earl's approach, he hastily tossed aside his
cigar. The earl "begged" he would take another; and tried to calm and
steady himself, by a moment's reflection upon his overwhelming
superiority over Titmouse in every respect; but it was in vain.

Now--to pause for a moment--what anxiety and embarrassment would not his
Lordship have been spared, had he been aware of one little fact; viz.
that Mr. Gammon was unconsciously, secretly, and potently, his friend,
in the great matter which lay so near to his heart? For so, in truth, it
was. He had used all the art he was master of, and availed himself of
all his mysterious power over Titmouse, to get him to make, at all
events, an _advance_ to his distinguished kinswoman. Considering,
however, how necessary it was "to be off with the old love before he was
on with the new," he had commenced operations by satisfying Titmouse
how vain and hopeless, and, indeed, unworthy of him, was his passion for
poor Miss Aubrey. Here, however, Gammon had not so much difficulty to
contend with as he had anticipated; for Miss Aubrey's image had been
long ago jostled out of Titmouse's recollection, by the innumerable
brilliant and fashionable women among whom he had been latterly thrown.
When, therefore, Gammon veraciously informed him that Miss Aubrey had
_fallen into a decline_! and that, moreover, when he (Gammon) had,
according to his promise to Titmouse, taken an opportunity of pressing
his wishes upon her, she had scornfully scouted the bare notion of such
a thing!

"'Pon--my soul! The--devil--she did!" said Titmouse, with an air of
insolent astonishment. "The gal's a devilish pretty gal, no doubt," he
presently continued, knocking the ashes off his cigar with an
indifferent air; "but--it's too good a joke--'pon my soul it is; but d'
ye think, Gammon, she ever supposed I _meant_ marriage? By Jove!" Here
he winked his eye at Gammon, and then slowly expelled a mouthful of
smoke. Gammon had grown pale with the conflict excited within him, by
the last words of the execrable little miscreant. He controlled his
feelings, however, and succeeded in preserving silence.

"Ah--well!" continued Titmouse, after another whiff or two, with an air
of commiseration, "if the poor gal's _booked_ for kingdom come--eh? it's
no use; there's no harm done. Deuced poor, all of 'em, I hear! It's
devilish hard, by the way, Gammon, that the prettiest gals are always
the soonest picked off for the churchyard!" As soon as Gammon had
completely mastered his feelings, he proceeded to excite the pride and
ambition of Titmouse, by expatiating upon the splendor of an alliance
with the last representative of the elder branch of so ancient and
illustrious a house; in fact, when Gammon came, he said, to think of it,
he feared it was _too_ grand a stroke, and that Lady Cecilia would not
entertain the notion for a moment. He told Titmouse that she had refused
crowds of young lords: that she would be a peeress of the realm in her
own right, with an independent income of £5,000 a-year; and have
mansions, seats, and castles, in each of the four quarters of the
kingdom! Topics such as these excited and inflated Titmouse to the full
extent desired by Mr. Gammon; who, moreover, with great solemnity of
manner, gave him distinctly to understand, that on his being able to
effect an alliance with the Lady Cecilia, absolutely depended his
continuance in, or expulsion from, the possession of the whole Yatton
property. Thus it came to pass, that Titmouse was penetrated by a far
keener desire to ally himself to the Lady Cecilia, than ever the earl
had experienced to bring about such an auspicious event; and at the very
moment of Titmouse's catching sight of the earl, while pacing up and
down the fir-tree walk, inhaling the soothing influence of his cigar--as
I a short time ago presented him to the reader--he was tormenting
himself with apprehensions that such a prize was too splendid for _him_
to draw, and asking himself the constantly recurring question, how, in
the name of all that was funny, could he set the thing a-going? When
Greek met Greek, _then_ came--it was said--the tug of war: and when the
Earl of Dreddlington and Titmouse--a great fool and a little fool?--came
to meet each other, impelled by the same wishes, and restrained by
similar apprehensions, it was like the encounter of two wily
diplomatists, sitting down with the intention of outwitting each other,
in obtaining an object, in respect of which their aim was, in
fact--unknown to each other--precisely coincident; this hidden
coincidence being the exact point which their exquisite manœuvres
had succeeded in reciprocally masking: it being quite possible for
Talleyrand and Pozzo di Borgo, thus pitted against each other, to have
separated, after a dozen long conferences, each having failed to secure
their common object--peace.

"Well, Mr. Titmouse"--commenced the earl, blandly, stepping at once,
with graceful boldness, out of the mist, confusion, and perplexity which
prevailed among his Lordship's ideas, few as they were--"_what are you
thinking about_?--For you _seem_ to be thinking!" and a courteous little
laugh accompanied the last words.

"'Pon--'pon my life--I--I--_beg_ your Lordship's pardon--but
it's--monstrous odd your Lordship should have known it"--stammered
Titmouse; and his face suddenly grew of a scarlet color.

"Sir," replied the earl, with greater skill than he had ever evinced in
his whole life before--(such is the effect of any one's being intensely
_in earnest_)--"it is not at all odd, when it happens that--the
probability is--that--we are, perhaps--mind, sir, I mean
possibly--thinking _about the same thing_!" Titmouse grew more and more
confused, gazing in silence, with a strange simpering stare, at his
noble companion, who, with his hands joined behind him, was walking
slowly along with Titmouse.

"Sir," continued the earl, in a low tone--breaking a very awkward
pause--"it gives me sincere satisfaction to assure you, that I can fully
appreciate the delicate embarrassment which I perceive you are now"----

"My Lord--your Lordship's most _uncommon_ polite"--quoth Titmouse,
suddenly taking off his hat, and bowing very low. The earl moved his hat
also, and slightly bowed, with a proudly gratified air; and again
occurred a pause, which was broken by Titmouse.

"Then your Lordship thinks--a--a--that--_it will do_?" he inquired very
sheepishly, but anxiously.

"Sir, I have the honor to assure you, that as far as I am concerned, I
see no obst"----

"Yes--but excuse me, my Lord--your Lordship sees--I mean--my Lord, your
Lordship sees----doesn't your Lordship?"

"Sir, I think--nay, I believe I _do_"--interrupted the earl, wishing to
relieve the evident embarrassment of his companion--"but--I see--nothing
that should--alarm you."

[How interesting to watch the mysterious process by which these two
powerful minds were gradually approximating towards understanding each
other! 'Twas a sort of _equation_ with an unknown quantity, in due
course of elimination!]

"Doesn't your Lordship, indeed?" inquired Titmouse, rather briskly.

"Sir, it was a saying of one of the great--I mean, sir, it is--you must
often have heard, sir--in short, _nothing venture, nothing have_!"

"I'd venture a precious deal, my Lord, if I only thought I could get
what _I'm_ after!"

"Sir?" exclaimed the earl, condescendingly.

"If your Lordship would only be so particular--so uncommon kind--as to
name the thing to her Ladyship--by way of--eh, my Lord? A sort of
breaking the ice, and all that"----

"Sir, I feel and have a just pride in assuring you, that the Lady
Cecilia is a young lady of that superior delicacy of"----

"_Does_ your Lordship really think I've a _ghost_ of a chance?"
interrupted Titmouse, anxiously. "_She_ must have named the thing to
your Lordship, no doubt--eh, my Lord?"

This queer notion of the young lady's delicacy a little staggered her
distinguished father for a moment or two. What was he to say? She and
he had really often named the thing to each other; and here the question
was put to him plumply. The earl scorned a flat lie, and never
condescended to equivocation except when it was absolutely necessary.

"Sir," he said hesitatingly; "undoubtedly--If I were to say--that now
and then, when your attentions have been so pointed"----

"'Pon my life, my Lord, I never meant it; if your Lordship will only
believe me," interrupted Titmouse, earnestly; "I beg a thousand
pardons--I mean no harm, my Lord."

"Sir, there is no harm done," said the earl, kindly. "Sir, I know human
nature too well, or I have lived thus long to little purpose, not to be
aware that we are not always master of our own feelings."

"That's exactly it, my Lord! Excuse me, but your Lordship's hit the
thing off to a T, as folks say!"

"Do not imagine, Mr. Titmouse, that I think your attentions may have
been _unpleasant_ to the Lady Cecilia--by no means; I cannot, with
truth, say any such thing!"

"Oh, my Lord!" exclaimed Titmouse, taking off his hat, bowing, and
placing his hand upon his breast, where his little heart was palpitating
with unusual force and distinctness.

"_Faint heart_, says the proverb, Mr. Titmouse, ah, ha!" quoth the earl,
with gentle gayety.

"Yes, my Lord, it's enough to make one faint indeed! Now, if your
Lordship--(I'm not used to this sort of thing, my Lord)--would just make
a sort of beginning for me, my Lord, with the Lady Cicely, to set us
going, my Lord--the least shove would do, my Lord--because, my Lord,
_courtship's_ a very--a--a"----

"Well, Mr. Titmouse," said the earl, with a gracious smile, "since your
modesty is so overpowering--I'll try--to become your ambassador to the
Lady Cecilia. If, Mr. Titmouse," his Lordship presently added in a
serious tone, "you are fortunate enough to succeed in engaging the
affections of the Lady Cecilia, you will discover that you have secured
indeed an invaluable prize."

"To be sure, my Lord! And consider, too, her Ladyship's uncommon high
rank--it's so particular condescending.--By the way, my Lord, will
she--if she and I can hit it off, so as to marry one another--be called
_Mrs. Titmouse_, or shall I be called _Lord Titmouse_? I wonder how that
will be, my Lord? 'Tis only, your Lordship understands, on Lady Cicely's
account I ask, because it's, in course, all one to _me_ when once we're
married."

The earl was gazing at him as he went on, with an expression of mingled
surprise and concern: presently, however, he added with calm
seriousness, "Sir, it is not an unreasonable question, though I should
have imagined that you could hardly--be--but--in short, the Lady Cecilia
will retain her rank, and become the Lady Cecilia Titmouse--that is,
during my life; but on my demise, she succeeds to the barony of
Drelincourt, and then will be called, of course, Lady Drelincourt."

"And what shall _I_ be then, my Lord?" inquired Titmouse, eagerly.

"Sir, you will of course continue Mr. Titmouse."

"'Pon my life, my Lord--shall I indeed?" he interrupted with a
crestfallen air, "must we be called _Mr. Titmouse and Lady Drelincourt_?
Excuse me, my Lord, but it don't sound at all like man and wife."

"Sir, so it always has been, and will be, and so it ever ought to be,"
replied the earl, gravely.

"Well but, my Lord, (excuse me, my Lord)--but marriage is a very serious
thing, my Lord, your Lordship knows"----

"It is, sir, indeed," replied the earl, gloom visibly overspreading his
features.

"Suppose," continued Titmouse, "Lady Cicely should die before me?"

The earl, remaining silent, fixed on Titmouse the eye of a FATHER--a
father, though a very foolish one; and presently, with a sensible tremor
in his voice, replied, "Sir, these are rather singular questions--but,"
he paused for some moments--"in such a mournful contingency as the one
you have hinted at"----

"Oh, my Lord! I humbly beg pardon--of course, I should be, 'pon my soul,
my Lord, most uncommon sorry"--interrupted Titmouse, with a little alarm
in his manner.

"I was saying, sir--that in such an event, if Lady Drelincourt left no
issue, you would succeed to the barony; but should she leave issue, they
will be called Honorable"----

"What!--'the Honorable Tittlebat Titmouse,' if it's a boy, and the
'Honorable Cecilia Titmouse,' if it's a girl?"

"Sir, it will be so--unless you should choose to take the name and arms
of Dreddlington, on marrying the sole heiress"----

"Oh! indeed, my Lord? 'Pon my life, my Lord, _that's_ worth
considering--because--betwixt your Lordship and I, I a'n't over and
above pleased with my own name. What will it cost to change it, now, my
Lord?"

"Sir," said the earl, struck with the idea, "that is really a thing
worth considering. But as for the _expense_--in an affair of such
magnitude, sir, I presume it would not be a matter of serious
consideration."

After some further conversation, the earl came plump upon the great
pivot upon which the whole arrangement was to turn--settlements and
jointures--oh, as to them, Titmouse, who was recovering from the shock
of the discovery that his marriage, however it might degrade the Lady
Cecilia, would not ennoble him--promised everything--would leave
everything in the hands of his Lordship. Soon afterwards they separated;
the earl suggesting to him, that probably in a matter of infinite
delicacy, like that on which they had been conversing, he would keep his
own counsel--to which also Titmouse pledged himself. Soon afterwards,
and before seeing his daughter, with an anxious, but not an excited air,
he ordered his horse, and took a long ride, accompanied only by his
groom: and if ever in his whole life he had attempted serious
REFLECTION, it was on the occasion of that same long, slow, and solitary
ride; then, for the first time, he forgot his peerage, and thought only
of the _man_--and the father.

But to what purpose? Shortly after his return, he sought the Lady
Cecilia, and performed his promise, by preparing her to receive,
probably on the ensuing day, the proposals of TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

The desired opportunity occurred the next day. Titmouse had slept like a
top all night, after smoking in his bedroom a great many cigars, and
drinking several tumblers of brandy and water. Lady Cecilia, however,
had passed a very uneasy, and almost a sleepless night, and did not make
her appearance at the breakfast-table. Understanding that her Ladyship
was in the drawing-room, and alone, about noon, Titmouse, who had
bestowed during the interval more than usual pains upon his dress,
gently opened the door, and observing her reclining alone on the sofa,
he closed the door behind him, with a sudden beating of the heart, and
approached her, bowing profoundly. Poor Lady Cecilia immediately sat up,
very pale and trembling.

"Good-morning, good-morning, Lady Cicely," commenced Titmouse, with
evident agitation, taking a chair and sitting down in it, plump opposite
to her.

"You aren't well this morning, are you, Lady Cicely?" he continued,
observing how pale she looked, and that she did not seem disposed to
speak.

"I am quite well," she replied in a low tone: and then each was silent.

"It's beginning to look like winter a little, eh, Lady Cicely?" said he,
after an embarrassing pause, looking through the windows--and his words
diffused an icy coldness over Lady Cecilia. 'Twas an overcast day; and a
strong wind was stripping the sere and yellow leaves in great numbers
from the lofty trees which were not far distant, and gave forth a
melancholy, rushing, moaning sound.

"Certainly it is getting rather cheerless," replied Lady Cecilia, after
several moments' pause. Titmouse turned pale; and twirling his fingers
in his hair, fixed upon her a stupid and most embarrassing look, under
which her eyes fell towards the ground, and remained looking in that
direction.

"I--I--hope his Lordship's been saying a good word for me, Lady Cicely?"
he inquired with an absurdly sheepish air.

"My father mentioned your name to me yesterday," she replied, trembling
excessively.

"'Pon my soul, monstrous kind!" said Titmouse, trying desperately to
look at his ease. "_Said_ he'd break the ice for me." Here ensued
another pause. "Everybody must have a beginning, you know. 'Pon my
solemn honor, Lady Cicely, all he said about me is quite true."
Profoundly as was Lady Cecilia depressed, she looked up at Titmouse for
a moment with evident surprise. "Now, Lady Cicely, just as between
friends, didn't he tell you something _very_ particular about me?
Didn't he? Eh?" She made him no answer.

"I dare say, Lady Cicely, though somehow you look sad enough, you a'n't
_vexed_ to see me here? Eh? There's many and many a woman in London that
would--but it's no use now. 'Pon my soul, I love you, I do, Lady
Cicely;" she trembled violently, for he was drawing his chair nearer to
her. She felt sick--sick almost to death; and a mist came for a moment
over her eyes.

"I know it's--it's a monstrous unpleasant piece of--I mean, it's an
awkward thing to do; but I hope you love _me_, Lady Cicely, eh! a
little?" Her head hung down, and a very scalding tear oozed out and
trickled down her cheek. "Hope you aren't sorry, dear Lady Cicely? _I'm_
most uncommon proud and happy! Come, Lady Cicely." He took the thin
white hand that was nearest him, and raised it to his lips. Had his
perceptions been only a trifle keener, he could not have failed to
observe a faint thrill pervade Lady Cecilia as he performed this act of
gallantry, and an expression of features which looked very much like
disgust. He had, however, seen love made on the stage, frequently; and,
as he had seen lovers do there, he now dropped down on one knee, still
holding Lady Cecilia's hand in his, and pressing it a second time to his
lips.

"If your Ladyship will only make me--so happy--as to be--my wife--'pon
my life you're welcome to all I have; and you may consider this place
entirely your own! Do you understand me, dearest Lady Cicely? Come! 'Pon
my life--I'm quite distracted--do you love me, Lady Cicely? Only say the
word." A faint--a very faint sound issued from her lips--'twas--blush
for her, my lady reader--"YES." [Oh, poor Lady Cecilia! Oh, fatal--fatal
falsehood!]

"Then, as true as God's in heaven, dear gal, I love you," said he, with
ardor and energy; and rising from his knee, he sat down beside her upon
the sofa--placed an arm round her waist; with his other hand grasped
hers--and--imprinted a kiss upon the pale cheek which had been so
haughtily withdrawn from the presumptuous advances of the Marquis de
Millefleurs, and from some half dozen others; several of whom had been
men of commanding pretensions--elegant in person and manners--of great
accomplishments--of intellect--of considerable fortune--of good family;
but in her opinion, and that of the earl her father, not of family good
_enough_, nor fortune considerable _enough_, to entitle any of them to
an alliance with her.

"'Pon my life, Lady Cicely, you _are_ a most lovely gal," quoth
Titmouse, with increasing energy--"and now you're all my own! Though I
_am_ only plain Mr. Titmouse, and you'll be Lady Cicely still--I'll make
you a good husband!" and again he pressed her hand and kissed her cold
cheek. But slow and dull as were the Lady Cecilia's feelings, they were
becoming too much excited to admit of her continuing much longer in the
room.

"I'm sure--you'll--excuse--me, Mr. Titmouse," said she, rising, and
speaking quickly and faintly. When she had regained her room, she wept
bitterly for upwards of an hour; and Miss Macspleuchan, well aware of
the cause of it, knew not how to console one who had so deliberately
immolated herself before the hideous little image of Mammon; who, in
degrading herself, had also--and Miss Macspleuchan, a true lady, when
alone, shed bitter and scalding tears, and her bosom swelled with
wounded pride and indignation at the thought--degraded her whole sex. In
due time, however, the _Aurora_, a fashionable morning London newspaper,
thus announced to the public, as an _auspicious_ event, the one which I
have so faithfully, feeling much pain the while, described to the
reader:--

     "It is rumored that Mr. Titmouse, who so lately recovered the very
     large estates of Yatton, in Yorkshire, and whose appearance in the
     fashionable world has created so great a sensation, and who is
     already connected, by consanguinity, with the ancient and noble
     family of Dreddlington, is about to form a closer alliance with it,
     and is now the accepted suitor of the lovely and accomplished Lady
     Cecilia Philippa Leopoldina Plantagenet, sole daughter and heiress
     of the Right Hon. the Earl of Dreddlington, and next in succession
     to the barony of Drelincourt, the most ancient, we believe, in the
     kingdom."




CHAPTER XI.


Behold now, thoughtful reader--for in your eyes it is anxiously desired
that this history may find favor--the dreadful--the desperate reverse in
Mr. Aubrey's circumstances. He has suddenly fallen from a very
commanding position in society: from that of a high-born English
gentleman, possessed of a fine unencumbered income, and all of luxury
and splendor, and of opportunity for gratifying a disposition of noble
munificence, that it can secure--and whose qualifications and prospects
justified him in aspiring to the highest senatorial distinction:--behold
him, I say, with his beloved and helpless family, sunk--lower than into
straitened circumstances--beneath even poverty--into the palsying
atmosphere of _debt_--and debt, too, inextricable and hopeless. Seeing
that no one can be so secure, but that all this, or something of the
like kind, may one day or other happen to him, 'tis hoped that it will
be found neither uninteresting nor uninstructive to watch carefully and
closely the present condition and _conduct_ of the Aubreys.

Bound hand and foot--so to speak--as Mr. Aubrey felt himself, and
entirely at the mercy of Mr. Titmouse and his solicitors, Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, what could he do but submit to almost any terms on
which they chose to insist? It will be recollected that Mr. Gammon's
proposal was,[28] that Mr. Aubrey should forthwith discharge, without
scrutiny, their bill of £3,946, 14s. 6d.; give sufficient security for
the payment of the sum of £10,000 to Mr. Titmouse, within twelve or
eighteen months' time, and two promissory notes for the sum of £5,000
each, payable at some future period, as to which he had to rely solely
on the sincerity and forbearance of Mr. Gammon, and the ratification of
his acts by Mr. Titmouse. This proposal was duly communicated by the
unfortunate Aubrey to Messrs. Runnington, who obtained from Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, a fortnight's time in which to deliberate upon
it. Messrs. Runnington almost immediately advised him to accept the
proposed terms as unquestionably fair, and, under the circumstances,
much more lenient than could have been expected. This might be so; but
yet, how dismaying and hopeless to _him_ the idea of carrying them into
effect! _How, indeed, was it to be done?_ First of all, how were Messrs.
Runnington's and Mr. Parkinson's bills to be got rid of--the former
amounting to £1,670, 12s., the latter to £756? And how were Mr. Aubrey
and his family to _live_ in the mean while, and how, moreover, were to
be met the expenses of his legal education? As was intimated in a former
part of this history, all that Mr. Aubrey had, on settling in London,
was £3,000 stock (equal to £2,640 of money) and £423 in his banker's
hands:--so that all his cash in hand was £3,063! and if he were to
devote the whole of it to the discharge of the three attorneys' bills
which he owed, he would still leave a gross balance unpaid of £3,310,
6s. 6d.! And yet for _him_ to talk of _giving security_ for the payment
of £10,000 within eighteen months, and his own notes of hand for £10,000
more! It was really almost maddening to sit down and contemplate all
this. But he must not fold his arms in impotence and despair--he must
look his difficulties straight in the face, and do the best that was in
his power. He resolved to devote every farthing he had, except £200, to
the liquidation of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's account, and (in
smaller proportion) of those also of Messrs. Runnington and Mr.
Parkinson; if necessary he resolved, though his heart thrilled with
anguish at the thought, to sell his books, and the remnant of old family
plate that he had preserved. Then he would strain every nerve to
contribute towards the support of himself and of his family--poor
oppressed soul!--by his literary exertions, in every moment that he
could spare from his legal studies; and practise the severest economy
that was consistent with health, and the preservation of a respectable
exterior. He resolved also, though with a shudder, to commit himself to
Gammon and Titmouse's mercy, by handing to them (though a fearful farce
it seemed) his two notes of hand for £10,000--_payable on demand_--for
such Gammon intimated was usual in such a case, and would be required in
the present one. But whither was he to look for security for the payment
of £10,000 within eighteen months' time? This was a matter which indeed
staggered him, and almost prostrated his energies whenever he directed
them to the subject; it occasioned him inexpressible agitation and
anguish. Individuals there were, he believed--he knew--who would
cheerfully enter into the desired security on his behalf; but what a
mockery! For them to be asked to secure _his_ payment of the sum, at the
time mentioned, was, in effect, palpably asking them to pay the money
for him; and in that light they could not but view such an application.
The reader will easily understand the potency of such considerations
upon so sensitive and high-minded a person as Mr. Aubrey. While
revolving these distracting and harassing topics in his mind, the name
of Lord De la Zouch always presented itself to him. Had he not
solemnly--repeatedly--_pledged_ himself to communicate with that kind,
and wealthy, and generous nobleman, in such an emergency as the present?
His Lordship's income was at least eighty or a hundred thousand pounds
a-year; his habits were simple and unostentatious, though he was of a
truly munificent disposition; and he had not a large and expensive
family--his only child being Mr. Delamere. He had ever professed, and,
as far as he had hitherto had an opportunity, proved himself to be a
devoted, a most affectionate friend to Mr. Aubrey:--did not Providence,
then, seem to point him out distinctly as one who should be applied to,
to rescue from destruction a fallen friend? And why should Aubrey
conjure up an array of imaginary obstacles, arising out of a diseased
delicacy? And whom were such scruples reducing to destitution along with
him!--his wife, his children, his devoted and noble-minded sister! But,
alas! the thought of sweet Kate suggested another source of exquisite
pain and embarrassment to Aubrey, who well knew the ardent and
inextinguishable passion for her entertained by young Delamere. 'Twas
true that, to pacify his father, and also not to grieve or harass Miss
Aubrey by the constant attentions with which he would have otherwise
followed her, he had consented to devote himself with great assiduity
and ardor to his last year's studies at Oxford; yet was he by no means
an infrequent visitor at Vivian Street, resolutely regardless of the
earnest entreaties of Miss Aubrey, and even of her brother. Not that
there was ever anything indelicate or obtrusive in his attentions;--how
could it be? Alas! Kate really loved him, and it required no very great
acuteness in Delamere to discover it. He was as fine, handsome a young
fellow as you could see anywhere; frank, high-spirited, accomplished,
with an exceedingly elegant deportment, and simple, winning manners--and
could she but be touched with a lively sense of the noble
disinterestedness of his attachment to her! I declare that Kate wrote
him several letters, in _bonâ fide_ dissuasion of his addresses, and
which wore such a genuine and determined air of repulsion, as would have
staggered most men; but young Delamere cared not one straw for any of
them: let Kate vary her tone as she pleased, he told her simply that he
had sent them to his mother, who said they were very good letters
indeed; so he would make a point of reading all she would send him, and
so forth. When Kate, with too solemn an emphasis to be mistaken or
encountered with raillery, assured him that nothing upon earth should
prevail upon her to quit her present station in her brother's family, at
all events until he had completely surmounted all his troubles,
Delamere, with looks of fond admiration, would reply that it signified
nothing, as he was prepared to wait her pleasure, and submit to any
caprice or unkindness in which her heart would allow her to indulge. I
must own that poor Kate was, on more than one occasion of his exhibiting
traits of delicate generosity towards her brother, so moved and melted
towards her lover, that she could--shall I say it?--have sunk into his
arms in silent and passionate acquiescence; for her heart had, indeed,
long been really his.--But whither am I wandering?--To return, then--I
say, that when Mr. Aubrey adverted for a moment to this state of things,
was it not calculated a thousand-fold to enhance the difficulty of his
applying _to the father of Delamere_? So indeed it was; and, torn with
conflicting emotions and considerations of this kind, nearly the whole
of the fortnight granted to him for deliberation had elapsed, before he
could make up his mind to apply to Lord De la Zouch. At length, however,
with a sort of calm desperation, he determined to do so; and when he had
deposited in the Post-Office his letter--one in every line of which the
noble and generous person to whom it was addressed might easily detect
the writhings of its writer's wounded spirit--the quiverings of a broken
heart--he looked indeed a melancholy object. The instant that, by
dropping his letter into the box, he had irrecoverably parted with all
control over it, and to Lord De la Zouch it must go, Aubrey felt as if
he would have given the world to recall it. Never had he heaved so many
profound sighs, and felt so utterly miserable and destitute, as during
his walk homeward that afternoon. Those dear beings did not know of the
step he had intended to take; nor did he tell them that he had taken it.
When he saw his sister he felt sick at heart; and during the whole of
the evening was so oppressed and subdued, that the faint anxious
raillery of lovely Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, and the unconscious
sportiveness of his children, served only to deepen the gloom which was
around his spirit!--He had requested Lord De la Zouch to address his
answer to him at the Temple; and sure enough, by return of post, Mr.
Aubrey found lying on his desk, on reaching the Temple three or four
mornings afterwards, a letter addressed, "Charles Aubrey, Esq., at
---- Weasel's, Esq., No. 3, Pomegranate Court, Temple, London;" and
franked, "DE LA ZOUCH."

"I shall return presently," said Mr. Aubrey to the clerk, with as much
calmness as he could assume, having put the letter into his pocket,
resolving to go into the Temple gardens and there read it, where any
emotion which it might excite, would be unobserved. Having at length
seated himself on a bench, under one of the old trees near the river,
with a somewhat tremulous hand he took out, and opened the letter, and
read as follows:--

                                 "_Fotheringham Castle, 18th July 18--._

       "MY VERY DEAR AUBREY,

     "If you really value my friendship, never pain my feelings again by
     expressions, such as are contained in your letter, of distrust as
     to the issue of _any_ application of yours to me. Has  anything
     that has ever hitherto passed between us, justified them? For
     Heaven's sake, tell your solicitors not to lose a moment in
     procuring the necessary instruments, and forwarding them to me
     through Messrs. Framlingham, _my_ solicitors. I will execute
     immediately all that are sent, and return them by the next post, or
     mail. If you will but at once set about this in a business-like
     way, I will forgive and forget all the absurd and _unkind_ scruples
     with which your letter abounds. Since you would probably make a
     mighty stir about it, I shall not at present dwell upon the
     _inexpressible pleasure_ it would give me to be allowed to
     emancipate you at once from the vulgar and grasping wretches who
     are now harassing you, my very dear Aubrey, and to constitute
     myself your creditor instead of them. But on further consideration,
     I suppose you would distress yourself on the ground of _my
     restricted_ means rendering it so much more difficult for me, than
     for them, to give you time for the payment of your debt!! Or will
     you PLAY THE MAN, and act at once in the way in which, I assure
     you, upon my honor, I would act by you, on a similar solicitation,
     were our situations reversed? By the way, I intend to insist on
     being your _sole surety_; unless, indeed, your creditors doubt my
     solvency, in which case I hope we shall be able, among our common
     friends, to find a sufficient co-surety!--

     "And now, dear Aubrey, how get you on with law? Does she smile, or
     scowl upon you? I wonder why you did not go to the fountain-head,
     and become at once a pupil to your friend, the Attorney-General.
     Who is the gentleman whom you are reading with? He certainly has
     rather a curious name! Well, my dear Aubrey, may Heaven in its own
     good time crown your virtuous efforts--your unconquerable
     resolution--with success! Won't it be odd if, when I am dead and
     gone, and my son is occupying my present place on the benches of
     the House of Lords, you should be sitting on the woolsack? More
     unlikely things than this have come to pass: look at----!

     "How are dear Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey, and your darling little
     ones? Though we are going in a fortnight's time to fill this old
     place, (the ----s, the ----s, and the ----s, and others, are
     coming,) we shall be, till then, quite deserted, and so, after they
     are gone. Would that we could insist on all of you taking up your
     abode with us! Have you seen Geoffrey lately? He tells me that he
     is working very hard indeed at Oxford; and so says his tutor. But I
     have my doubts; for it is more than ever I did. Pray write me by
     return. I am ever, my dear Aubrey, yours, faithfully and
     affectionately,
                                                          "DE LA ZOUCH."

     "CHARLES AUBREY, Esq.

     "P. S. On further consideration, let _your_ people send the deeds,
     &c., at once on to me, direct from themselves;--'tis a private
     matter, which is of no consequence to any one but ourselves. No one
     else, indeed, except your own solicitors, and your opponents, need
     know anything about it. Neither Lady De la Zouch nor my son will
     have the least inkling of the matter."

No language of mine can do justice to the feelings with which Mr.
Aubrey, after many pauses, occasioned by absolutely irrepressible
emotion, perused the foregoing letter. Its generosity was infinitely
enhanced by its delicacy; and both were exquisitely appreciated by a man
of his susceptibility, and in his circumstances. His eyes--his heart,
overflowed with unutterable gratitude towards the Almighty, and the
noble instrument of his mercy. He could have flown on the wings of the
wind to the dear beings in Vivian Street, with joyous face and light
elastic step, to make them participators in his joy. He rose and walked
to and fro by the river side with most exhilarated spirits. The sky was
cloudless: the sun shone brilliantly; and innumerable brisk and busy
craft were moving to and fro upon the swelling bosom of the magnificent
Thames. Gladness was in his soul. The light without was typical of that
within. Several times he was on the point of starting off to Vivian
Street; but, on consideration, he resolved to go to Messrs. Runnington,
and put them into instant communication with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap; and matters having been set in train for the speediest possible
settlement, Mr. Aubrey returned to chambers; but quitted them an hour
earlier than usual, to brighten the countenances of those he loved, by
the joyous intelligence he bore. But he found that they also had
cheering news to communicate; so that this was indeed a memorable day to
them.

Lady Stratton, not only a relative, but a devoted bosom friend of the
late Mrs. Aubrey, had, it may easily be believed, never ceased to take a
lively interest in the fortunes of the unhappy Aubreys. She was now far
advanced in years, and childless; and though she enjoyed an ample life
income, derived from the liberality of her husband, Sir Beryl Stratton,
Baronet, who had died some twenty or thirty years before; yet, seeing no
necessity for saving money, she had followed the noble example of her
deceased friend Mrs. Aubrey, and bestowed annually all her surplus
income in the most liberal and systematic charity. Many years before,
however, she had resolved upon making a provision for Miss Aubrey, whom
she loved as if she had been her mother; and the expedient she had
resorted to (quite unknown to the Aubreys) was to insure her life for
the sum of £15,000, the whole of which sum she had intended to bequeath
to Miss Aubrey. The premiums on so large an insurance, were heavy annual
drains upon her purse; and, together with her long-continued charities,
and the expenditure necessary to support her station, left her but
stinted means for contributing to the relief of the ruined Aubreys. With
some difficulty, however, the old lady, in one way or another,
principally by effecting a loan from the insurance company upon her
policy, had contrived to raise a sum of £2,000; and Miss Aubrey had that
morning received a letter from her, full of tenderness, begging her to
present the sum in question (for which Lady Stratton had lodged a credit
with her bankers in London) to her brother Mr. Aubrey, to dispose of as
he pleased--trusting that it might be effectual in relieving him from
the difficulties which were more immediately pressing upon him. Never
had they spent so happy an evening together since they had quitted
Yatton. In the excitement of the hour, even Aubrey felt for a while as
if they now saw their way through all their embarrassments and dangers.
Can the reader imagine what must have been the feelings of Miss Aubrey
when she first heard of, and afterwards reflected upon, the princely
munificence of Lord De la Zouch? If he can, it is well--it is more than
I am equal to describing. Her agitation kept her awake more than half
the night; and when she appeared at breakfast, her brother's quick eye
detected in her countenance the traces of a severe conflict of feelings.
With him also much of the excitement occasioned by the two occurrences
above mentioned, had disappeared by the time that he took his seat in
his little study at his usual early hour. First of all, he felt very
uneasy in receiving so large a sum from Lady Stratton, whom he knew to
be by no means rich--at all events, not rich enough to part with so
considerable an amount without inconvenience; and he resolved not to
accept of her proffered kindness, unless she would allow him to transmit
to her his bond for the repayment, together with interest on what he
might borrow. Surely this was an unnecessary step; yet where is the man
who, on all occasions, acts precisely as a calm and reflecting observer
of his conduct, _long afterwards_, could have wished him to act? One
must make allowance for the feelings which prompted him--those of a
highly honorable and independent and over-sensitive man, who felt
himself oppressed already by the weight of pecuniary obligation which he
had incurred, and sought for the semblance of relief to his feelings by
receiving that as a _loan_, only, which had been nobly proffered as a
gift; and thus, as it were, in point of fact destroying all the grace
and courtesy of the benefaction; but it is useless discussing the
matter. I regret that Mr. Aubrey should have allowed himself to be
influenced by such considerations; but so it was--and worthy Lady
Stratton was informed by him in a letter certainly abounding in
expressions of heartfelt gratitude and affection, that he had availed
himself of her generous assistance, but only on the terms of his being
allowed to deposit his bond for the repayment of it, with interest, with
her solicitors; expressing his hope that ere long he should be enabled
to fulfil every engagement into which he might have entered.

This seasonable assistance enabled him to make the following arrangement
for liquidating the sums due on account of his sickening attorney's
bills:--

    Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's bill was  £3,946 14 6
    Messrs. Runnington's                         1,670 12 0
    Mr. Parkinson's                                756  0 0
                                                -----------
                                                £6,373  6 6

These were his liabilities. Then his assets were:--

    Money in the funds                               £2,640
    Money at his banker's                               423
    Advanced by Lady Stratton                         2,000
                                                     ------
                                                     £5,063

    Therefore, from             £6,373 6 6
    Deduct                       5,063 0 0
                                ----------
    And there remained          £1,310 6 6

As soon as he had made the foregoing statement on a slip of paper early
in the morning in his study, (as already intimated,) he averted his eye
from it, for a moment, with a sort of cold shudder. Were he to devote
every farthing of assets that he had, he still could not come within
£1,310 odd of his mere attorney's bills. What was he to do? The result
of a long and anxious morning's calculation and scheming was to
appropriate £4,000 of his assets thus--(if he could prevail upon his
creditors to be for the present content with it:)--

    To Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap                £2,500
    Messrs. Runnington                                 1,000
    Mr. Parkinson                                        500
                                                      ------
                                                      £4,000

If this arrangement could be effected, then he would be able to reserve
in his own hands £1,063, and retain liabilities as under:--

    Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's (balance)  £1,446 14 6
    Messrs. Runnington's (ditto)                    670 12 0
    Mr. Parkinson's (ditto)                         256  0 0
                                                 -----------
                                                 £2,373  6 6

Heavy was his heart at beholding this result of even the most favorable
mode of putting his case: but he placed the memoranda in his
pocket-book, and repaired to his dressing-room; and having completed his
toilet, appeared at breakfast with as cheerful a countenance as he could
assume. Each of the three assembled, perceived, however, that the others
were _striving_ to look gay and happy. Suffice it to say, that within a
week's time, Messrs. Runnington received the necessary security from
Lord De la Zouch, who had thereby bound himself in the penal sum of
£20,000 that Mr. Aubrey should, on or before the 24th day of January
18--, (that is, in eighteen months' time from the date of the bond,) pay
the principal sum of £10,000, with interest at 5 per cent; and this
instrument, together with Mr. Aubrey's two promissory-notes for £5,000
each, and also cash to the amount of £2,500 in part payment of their
bill, having been delivered to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--who,
after a great deal of reluctance on the part of Mr. Quirk, finally
consented to allow the balance of £1,446, 14s. 6d. to stand over--they
gave him, first, a receipt for so much on account of their own bill; and
secondly, an instrument by which Tittlebat Titmouse, for the
considerations therein expressed, did "_remise, release, and forever
quit claim_," unto Charles Aubrey, his heirs, executors, and
administrators, all other demands whatsoever, [_i. e._ other than the
said sum of £20,000.] By this arrangement Mr. Aubrey was absolutely
exonerated from the sum of £40,000, in which he stood indubitably
indebted to Mr. Titmouse; and so far he had just cause for
congratulation. But was not his situation still one calculated to
depress and alarm him more and more every time that he contemplated it?
Where was he to find the sum requisite to release Lord De la Zouch from
any part of his enormous liability? For with such a surety in their
power as that great and opulent peer, was it likely that Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, would be otherwise than peremptory and inflexible when
the day of payment arrived? And if so, with what feelings must Mr.
Aubrey see his noble and generous friend called upon to pay down nearly
£11,000 for him? And was he not liable at any moment upon his own two
notes for £5,000 each? And were they not likely to insist speedily on
the discharge of their own serious balance of £1,446 odd? What more
probable, than that persons such as they and their client were
represented to be, would, as soon as they decently could, proceed to
extremities with him, in the confidence that the sight and the sound of
his agonies would call in powerful and affluent friends to his
assistance?

Still pressed, as indeed he was, his spirit had by no means lost its
elasticity, supported as he was by a powerful, an unconquerable
WILL--and also by a devout reliance upon the protection of Providence.
Though law is indeed an exhausting and absorbing study, and it was
pursued by Mr. Aubrey with unflagging energy, yet he found time (those
who choose may find time enough for everything) to contribute sensibly
to the support of himself and his family by literary labors, expended
principally upon compositions of an historical and political character,
and which were forwarded from time to time to the distinguished Review
which has been already mentioned. To produce, as he produced, articles
of this description--of considerable length and frequency--requiring
ready, extensive, and accurate knowledge, and careful composition;
original and vigorous in their conception and their execution, and by
their intrinsic merit arresting, immediately on their appearance, the
attention of the public; I say, to do such things--and only in those
precious intervals which ought to have been given to the relaxation of
his strained mental and physical powers--and under the pressure, too, of
such overpowering anxieties as were his--argued surely the possession of
superior energies--of an indomitable resolution. All this while,
moreover, he contrived to preserve an unruffled _temper_--which, with a
man of such sensibilities as his, afforded indeed a signal instance of
self-control; and in short, on all these grounds, Mr. Aubrey appears
really entitled to our deepest sympathy and respect. I spoke of his
anxieties. Suppose, thought he, health should fail him, what was to
become of him, and of those absolutely dependent upon him? Suppose
illness should invade the dear members of his family, what was in
prospect but destitution--or surrendering them up--bitter and
heart-breaking contingency!--to the precarious _charity_ of others. What
would avail all his exhausting labors in the acquisition of professional
knowledge, while his liberty was entirely at the command of Mr.
Titmouse, and Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, who might, at any moment,
actuated by mercenary motives, or impelled by caprice, blight all his
prospects, and incarcerate him in a prison! Yet, under this burden--to
adopt the language of Sir Henry Spelman on an analogous occasion, "_non
ingentem solum, sed perpetuis humeris sustinendum_"--Mr. Aubrey stood
firmly. He felt that he was called upon to sustain it; a blessed spirit
ever, as it were, beside him, whispering the consolatory assurance, that
all this was ordered and designed by the Supreme Disposer of events, as
a _trial_ of his constancy, and of his faith, and that the _issue_ was
with HIM. It is mercifully ordained, that "hope springs eternal in the
human breast," and that, too, in every turn and variety of mortal
misery. It was so with Aubrey. So long as he felt his health unimpaired,
and his mental energies in full vigor, he looked on these blessings as a
sort of guarantee from Heaven that he should be able to carry on a
successful, though it might be a long and wearisome, struggle with
adverse circumstances. Still it cost him a very painful effort to assume
and preserve that exterior of tranquillity, which should calm and assure
the beloved beings associated with him in this hour of peril and
suffering; and oftener than they chose to let him know of it, did the
keen eye of a wife's, and sister's love, detect the gloom and oppression
which darkened his countenance, and saddened his manner. Theirs was,
notwithstanding all I have said, a happy little home. He was generally
punctual to his dinner-hour, to a moment; knowing the thousand fears on
his account which would otherwise assail the fond beings who were
counting the minutes till his arrival. When they had once thus met, they
seldom separated till bed-time. Sometimes Miss Aubrey would sit down to
her piano, and accompany herself in some song or air, which equally,
whether merry or mournful, revived innumerable touching and tender
recollections of former days; and she often ceased, tremulously and in
tears, in which she was not unfrequently joined by both of those who had
been listening to her. Then he would betake himself to his labors for
the rest of the evening (not quitting the room), they either assisting
him--fair and eager amanuenses! or themselves reading, or engaged at
needlework. Oh! it was ecstasy, too, to that poor oppressed father to
enter into the wild sports and gambols of his light-hearted little ones,
Charles and Agnes, who always made their appearance for about a couple
of hours after dinner; to tell them "stories;" to listen to theirs; to
show them pictures; to hear Charles read; and to join heartily in their
frolics, even rolling about on the floor with them! But when he paused
for a moment, and his wife and Kate succeeded him as their playmates,
for a short interval; when his eye followed their movements--what sudden
and sharp pangs would pass through his heart, as he thought of the
future, and what was to become of them!--And when their maid arrived at
the appointed hour, causing all sport instantly to cease, and longing
looks to be directed to papa and mamma, saying as plainly as could be
said, "only a _few_ minutes more," how fondly would he embrace them! and
when he felt their tiny arms clasping his neck and caressing him, and
their kisses "all over" his face, feelings were excited within him,
which were too deep for utterance--which defy description. 'Tis said--I
know not with what truth--of Robespierre, as an instance of his fearful
refinement in cruelty, that a person of distinction who had become
obnoxious to him he formally condemned to death, but allowed to remain
in the torturing, the excruciating presence of his lovely family; he and
they aware, all the while, that his doom was _irrevocable_, inevitable;
and he momentarily liable to the summons to the guillotine, and which
in fact--oh, horror!--came at length, when they were all seated
together, one day, at the breakfast-table! Oh, the feelings with which
that unfortunate person must have daily regarded the countenances of
those around him! How applicable to his condition the heart-breaking
strains of Medea--

    [Greek:  Pheu pheu, ti prosderkesthe m' ommasin, tekna;
    Ti prosgelate ton panustaton gelôn;
    Ai, ai, ti drasô; Kardia gar oichetai,
    Gunaikes, omma phaidron ôs eidon teknôn.][29]

The above passage was one which very frequently, on the occasions I have
alluded to, occurred to the mind of Mr. Aubrey; for he felt himself
indeed every moment at the mercy of those to whom he owed such a fearful
amount of money, and for which he was liable, at any moment selected by
malice or rapacity, to be plucked from his little home, and cast into
prison!

Oh, happy ye, now reading these pages, _unto whom the lines are fallen
in pleasant places! yea, who have a goodly heritage_; who live, as it
were, in a _land flowing with milk and honey_; with whom life glides
away like a tranquil and pleasant dream; who are not sternly bidden _to
eat your bread with quaking, and drink your water with trembling and
with carefulness_,[30] nor _in vain to rise up early_, to _sit up late,
to eat the bread of sorrows_; who have, indeed, _no thought for the
morrow_;--oh, ye who have leisure and ample means to pursue the objects
of an honorable ambition, undisturbed by daily fears for daily bread--by
terror, lest implacable creditors should at length frustrate all your
efforts, drive you from your position in society, and precipitate you
and yours into ruin;--I say, oh ye! do I appeal to you in vain? Do you
turn from this painful portion of my narrative with indifference, or
contempt, or wearisomeness? If the mere _description_, brief though it
may be, of the sufferings of the Aubreys be trying and unpleasing to
you, what must have been to them the actual _endurance_? Poor Aubrey! As
he walked along the crowded thoroughfares, morning and evening, between
the Temple and Vivian Street, what a disheartening consciousness he felt
of his personal insignificance! Which of the passengers, patrician or
plebeian, who met or passed him, cared--if personally unknown to
him--one straw for him, or _would_ have cared a straw for him, had they
even known the load of misery and misfortune under which he staggered
past them? Every time that he thus passed between the scene of his
absorbing labors at the Temple, and that green spot--his house in Vivian
Street--in the world's wide desert, where only his heart was refreshed
by the never-failing spring of domestic love and tenderness, he felt, as
it were, but a prisoner out upon parole! It is easy to understand that,
when a man walks along the streets of London, depressed in spirit, and
alarmed by the consciousness of increasing pecuniary embarrassment, his
temper is likely to become irritable, his deportment forbidding, his
spirit stern and soured, particularly against those who appeal to his
charity; which then, indeed, he might be pardoned for feeling, and
bitterly--_to begin at home_. It was not so, however, with Aubrey, whose
constant feeling was--_Haud ignarus mali, miseris succurrere disco_; and
though it may appear a small thing to mention, I feel gratification in
recording of him, that, desperate as were his circumstances, infinitely
enhanced to him as was the value of money, he went seldom unprovided
with the means of relieving the humbler applicants for charity whom he
passed in the streets--of dropping some small token of his love and pity
into the trembling and feeble hand of _want_--of those whose necessities
he felt to be greater even than his own. Never, indeed, did the timid
eye of the most tattered, starved, and emaciated object suffered to
crawl along the streets, catch that of Mr. Aubrey, without making his
heart acknowledge the secret bond of misery which bound them
together--that he beheld a brother in bondage, and on whom he cheerfully
bestowed the humble pittance which he believed that Providence had yet
left at his disposal!--Prosperity and adversity have equally the effect,
upon an inferior mind and heart, of generating _selfishness_. The one
encourages, the other forces it. Misery is apt to think its own
sufferings greater than those of any one else--and naturally. The eye,
as it were, is filled with the object--that is to say, of distress and
danger--which is nearest--which is in such fearful contiguity, obscuring
from view all remoter objects, at once scaring away presence of mind,
and centring its hopes and fears upon _self_. Not so, however, is it
when a noble nature is the sufferer--and more especially when that
nature is strengthened and brightened by the support and consolation
derived from philosophy--and, above all, religion. To many a strong
spirit, destitute of such assistance, alas! how often, under similar
circumstances, have come--ghastly visitants!--_Despair_ and _Madness_,
with their hideous attendant SUICIDE, to do their bidding?

To Mr. Aubrey the Sabbath was indeed not only a day for performing the
public services of religion, but also a day of real rest from the labors
of life. It was not one, to him, of puritanical gloom or excitement, but
of sincere, cheerful, fervent, enlightened devotion. It would have been
to the reader, I think, not an uninteresting sight to behold this
unfortunate and harassed family at church. They took almost the only pew
which was vacant in the gallery--in a church not far distant from Vivian
Street--a pew just holding themselves and little Charles; who, since
their arrival in town, had begun to accompany them to the morning
service. There was something in their appearance--punctual as they were
in both the morning and evening--which could hardly fail to have
interested any one who observed them. There were two very elegant and
lovely women, dressed in simple half-mourning: a man of calm,
gentlemanly manners, and an intellectual countenance, but overshadowed
with deep seriousness, if not melancholy--as, indeed, was the case with
the whole of the little group, except the beautiful child, Charles. If
their mere appearance was thus calculated to interest those around, who
beheld them so punctual in their attendance, how much would that
interest have been increased, had the beholder known their singular and
melancholy history? Here were individuals, whose condition was testing
the reality of the consolations of religion, exhibiting humility,
resignation, faith, a deep delight in attending the house of HIM who had
permitted such dreadful disasters to befall them, and whose will it yet
seemed to be that they should pass through deeper sufferings than they
had yet experienced. His temple seemed, indeed, to them, a refuge and
shelter from the storm. To Mr. Aubrey every portion of the church
service was precious, for its purity, its simplicity, its solemnity, its
fervor, its truly scriptural character, its adaptation to every
imaginable condition of feeling and of circumstance, indeed, "to all
sorts and conditions of men." A little incident fraught with much
interest, occurred to them shortly after they commenced their attendance
at the church. An occasional sermon was preached one evening by a
stranger, from the words "_Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him_,"
on behalf of a neighboring dispensary. Mr. Aubrey was soon struck by the
unusual strength and beauty of the sermon, in point of composition--the
fervor and simplicity of the preacher. Its language was at once chaste
and forcible; its reasoning clear and cogent; its illustration apt and
vivid; its pathos genuine. As he went on, Mr. Aubrey became more and
more convinced that he had seen or heard the preacher before; and on
inquiring, afterwards, his name, his impressions proved to be
correct;--the clergyman had been at Oxford, at the very same college
with him, and this was the first time that they had since come within
sight of each other. Mr. Aubrey very soon afterwards had an opportunity
of introducing himself to the clergyman, and was recognized, and they
renewed their early friendship. Mr. Neville--for that was his name--poor
soul, had nothing upon earth to support himself with, but an afternoon
lectureship in one of the city churches, from which he derived about £75
a-year; and on this sum alone he had contrived, for the last four or
five years, to support both himself and his wife--a very amiable and
fond woman. Fortunately, they had no children; but they had seen much
affliction, each of them being in but precarious health, and a sad
proportion of his little income was, consequently, devoted to doctors'
bills. He was an admirable scholar; a man of very powerful
understanding, and deeply read in metaphysics and divinity. Yet this
wretched pittance was all he could procure for his support; and pinching
work for them, poor souls, it was indeed, to "make ends meet." They
lived in very small but creditable lodgings; and amid all their
privations, and with all the gloom of the future before them, they were
as cheerful a little couple as the world ever saw. They dearly loved,
and would have sacrificed everything for each other; and so long as they
could but keep their chins above water, and he realize the stern and
noble feeling, "pauper, _sed in meo ære_," they cared not for their
exclusion from most of the comforts and all the elegancies of life. They
were, both of them, entirely resigned to the will of Heaven as to their
position--nay, in all things. She generally accompanied him
whithersoever he went; but on the occasion to which I have been
alluding, the good little creature was lying at home in bed, enduring
great suffering; and the thought of it made the preacher's heart very
heavy, and his voice to falter a little, several times during his
sermon. He was perfectly delighted when Mr. Aubrey introduced himself;
and when the latter had heard all his friend's little history--who had
indeed a child-like simplicity and frankness, and told Mr. Aubrey
everything he knew about himself--Mr. Aubrey wrung his hand with great
emotion, almost, indeed, too great for expression. It seemed that a
bishop, before whom poor Neville had accidentally preached seven years
before, had sent for him, and expressed such a very high opinion of his
sermon, as led him reasonably to look for some little preferment at his
Lordship's hands; but in vain. Poor Neville had no powerful friends, and
the bishop was overwhelmed with applicants for everything he had to give
away; so it is not much to be wondered at, that, in time, he totally
lost sight of Mr. Neville, and of the hopes which had blossomed, but to
be blighted. What touched Mr. Aubrey to the soul, was the unaffected
cheerfulness with which poor Mr. Neville--now in his fortieth
year--reconciled himself to his unpromising circumstances; the calmness
with which he witnessed the door of preferment evidently _shut upon him
forever_. Mr. Aubrey obtained from him his address; and resolved that,
though, for reasons long ago explained, he had withdrawn from almost
every one of his former friends and associates, yet with this poor, this
neglected, but happy clergyman, he would endeavor to renew and cement
firmly their early-formed but long-suspended friendship. And when, on
his return to Vivian Street, (whither Mrs. and Miss Aubrey had proceeded
alone, at his request, while he walked on with Mr. Neville,) he told
them the little history which I have above indicated to the reader, how
the hearts of all of them went forth towards one who was in many
respects a fellow-sufferer with themselves, and, _practising what he
preached_, was really a pattern of resignation to the will of God; of
humble but hearty faith in His mercy and loving-kindness!

Mr. Aubrey was not long in paying his promised visit to Mr. Neville,
accompanied by Mrs. Aubrey. 'Twas a long and not very agreeable walk for
them towards St. George's in the East; and on reaching a small row of
neat houses, only one story high, and being shown into Mr. Neville's
very little sitting-room, they found Mrs. Neville lying on a little
rickety sofa near the fire, looking very ill, and Mr. Neville sitting
before her, with a number of books on the table, and pen, ink, and
paper, with which he was occupied preparing his next Sunday's sermon;
but there was also a slip of paper on the table of a different
description, and which had occasioned both of them great distress; viz.
a rather peremptory note from their medical man, touching the payment of
his "trifling account" of £14 odd. Where poor Neville was to obtain such
a sum, neither he nor his wife knew: they had already almost deprived
themselves of necessary food and clothing to enable them to appease
another urgent creditor; and this new and sudden demand of an old claim,
had indeed grievously disquieted them. They said nothing about it to Mr.
and Mrs. Aubrey, who soon made themselves at home, and by their
unaffected simplicity and cordiality of manner, relieved their humble
hosts from all anxiety. They partook of tea, in a sufficiently homely
and frugal style; and before they rose to go they exacted a promise,
that, as soon as Mrs. Neville should have recovered, they would both
come and spend a long day in Vivian Street. They soon became very
intimate; and, Mrs. Neville's health at length being such as to preclude
her from attending at all to her needle, the reader will possibly think
none the less of Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, when he hears that they insisted
on taking that task upon themselves, (a matter in which they were
becoming somewhat expert,) and many and many an hour did these two
charming women spend, both in Vivian Street and at Mrs. Neville's, in
relieving her from her labors--particularly in preparing her slight
stock of winter clothing. And now that I am on this point, I may as well
mention another not less amiable trait in Kate; that, hearing of a
girl's school about to be founded in connection with the church which
they attended, and in support of which several ladies had undertaken to
prepare various little matters, such as embroidery, lace, pictures, and
articles of fancy and ornament, Kate also set to work with her pencil
and brushes. She was a very tasteful draughtswoman, and produced four or
five such delicate and beautiful sketches, in water color, of scenes in
and about Yatton, as made her a very distinguished contributor to the
undertaking; each of her sketches producing upwards of two guineas. She
also drew a remarkably spirited crayon sketch of the pretty little head
of Charles--who accompanied her to the place where her contributions
were deposited, and delivered it in with his own hand.--Thus, in short,
were this sweet and amiable family rapidly reconciling themselves to
their altered circumstances--taking real pleasure in the new scenes
which surrounded them, and the novel duties devolving upon them; and as
their feelings became calmer, they felt how true it is that happiness in
this world depends not upon mere external circumstances, but upon THE
MIND--which, contented and well regulated, can turn everything around it
into a source of enjoyment and thankfulness--making indeed _the
wilderness to bloom and blossom as the rose_.

They kept up--especially Kate--a constant correspondence with good old
Dr. Tatham; who, judging from the frequency and the length of his
letters, which were written with a truly old-fashioned distinctness and
uniformity of character, must have found infinite pleasure in his task.
So also was it with Kate, who, if she had even been writing to her
lover--nay, between ourselves, what would Mr. Delamere have given to
have had addressed to himself one of the long letters, crossed down to
the very postscript, full of sparkling delicacy, good nature, and good
sense, which so often found their way to the "Rev. Dr. Tatham, Vicarage,
Yatton, Yorkshire!" They were thus apprised of everything of moment that
transpired at Yatton, to which their feelings clung with unalienable
affection. Dr. Tatham's letters had indeed almost always a painful
degree of interest attached to them. From his frequent mention of Mr.
Gammon's name--and almost equally _favorable_ as frequent--it appeared
that he possessed a vast ascendency over Mr. Titmouse, and was, whenever
he was at Yatton, in a manner, its moving spirit. The doctor represented
Titmouse as a truly wretched creature, with no more sense of religion
than a monkey; equally silly, selfish, and vulgar--unfeeling and
tyrannical wherever he had an opportunity of exhibiting his real
character.

It exquisitely pained them, moreover, to find pretty distinct
indications of a sterner and stricter rule being apparent at Yatton,
than had ever been known there before, so far as the tenants and
villagers were concerned. Rents were now required to be paid with the
utmost punctuality; many of them were raised, and harsher terms
introduced into their leases and agreements. In Mr. Aubrey's time a
distress or an action for rent was a thing literally unheard of in any
part of the estate; but nearly a dozen had occurred since the accession
of Mr. Titmouse. If this had been at the instance of the ruling spirit,
Mr. Gammon personally had certainly got none of the odium of the
proceeding; every letter announcing a resort to hostile measures
expressly purporting to be authorized by Mr. Titmouse himself; Mr.
Gammon on most of such occasions, putting in a faint word or two in
favor of the tenant, but ineffectually. The legal proceedings were
always conducted in the name of "Bloodsuck and Son," whose town agents
were, "Quirk, Gammon, and Snap;" but _their_ names never came under the
eye of the defendants! No longer could the poor villagers, and poorer
tenants, reckon on their former assistance from the Hall in the hour of
sickness and distress: cowslip wine, currant wine, elderberry wine, if
made, were consumed in the Hall. In short, there was a discontinuance of
all those innumerable little endearing courtesies, and charities, and
hospitalities, which render a good old country mansion the very _heart_
of the neighborhood. The doctor in one of his letters, intimated, with a
sort of agony, that he had heard it mentioned by the people at the Hall
as probable, that Mr. Titmouse--the little Goth--would pull down that
noble old relic, the turreted gateway; but that Mr. Gammon was
vehemently opposed to such a measure; and that, if it were preserved
after all, it would be entirely owing to the taste and the influence of
that gentleman. Had Dr. Tatham chosen, he could have added a fact which
would indeed have saddened his friends--viz. that the old sycamore,
which had been preserved at the fond entreaties of Kate, and which was
hallowed by so many sad and tender associations, had been long ago
removed, as a sort of eyesore: Mr. Gammon had, in fact, directed it to
be done; but he repeatedly expressed to Dr. Tatham, confidentially, his
regret at such an act on the part of Titmouse. The doctor could also
have told them that there had been a dog-fight in the village, at which
Mr. Titmouse was present! Persons were beginning to make their
appearance too, at Yatton, of a very different description from any who
had been seen there in the time of the Aubreys--persons, now and then,
of loose, and wild, and reckless characters. Mr. Titmouse would often
get up a fight in the village, and reward the victor with five or ten
shillings! Then the snug and quiet little "Aubrey Arms" was
metamorphosed into the "Titmouse Arms" and another set up in opposition
to it, and called "The Toper's Arms;" and it was really painful to see
the increasing trade driven by each of them. They were both full every
night, and often during the day also; and the vigilant, and
affectionate, and grieved eye of the good vicar noticed several seats in
the church, which had formerly been occupied every Sunday morning and
afternoon, to be--empty! In his letters, he considerately sank the
grosser features of Titmouse's conduct, which would have only uselessly
grieved and disgusted his beloved correspondents. He informed them,
however, from time to time, of the different visitors at the Hall,
particularly of the arrival and movements of their magnificent kinsfolk,
the Earl of Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia, the Marquis Gants-Jaunes de
Millefleurs and Mr. Tuft--the novel state and ceremony which had been
suddenly introduced there--at which they all ceased reading for a
moment, and laughed, well knowing the character of Lord Dreddlington. At
length, some considerable time after Mr. Titmouse's grand visitors had
been at the Hall, there came a letter from Dr. Tatham, sent by a private
hand, and not reaching Vivian Street till the evening, when they were
sitting together, after dinner, as usual, and which contained
intelligence that was received in sudden silence, and with looks of
astonishment; viz. _that Mr. Titmouse had become the acknowledged suitor
of the Lady Cecilia_!! Mr. Aubrey, after a moment's pause, laughed more
heartily than they had heard him laugh for many months--getting up, at
the same time, and walking once or twice across the room--Mrs. Aubrey
and Miss Aubrey gazed at each other for a few moments, without speaking
a word; and you could not have told whether their fair countenances
showed more of amusement or of disgust at the intelligence. "Well! it is
as I have often told you, Kate," commenced Mr. Aubrey, after a while
resuming his seat, and addressing his sister with an air of good-humored
raillery; "you've lost your chance--you've held your head so high. Ah,
'tis all over now--and our fair cousin is mistress of Yatton!"

"Indeed, Charles," quoth Kate, earnestly, "I do think it's too painful a
subject for a joke."

"Why, Kate!--You must bear it as well"----

"Pho, pho--nonsense, Charles! To be serious--did you ever hear anything
so shocking as"----

"Do you mean to tell me, Kate," commenced her brother, assuming suddenly
such a serious air as for a moment imposed on his sister, "that to
become mistress of dear old Yatton--which was _offered_ to you, you
know--you would not have consented, when it came to the point, to
become--Mrs. _Titmouse_?" For an instant, Kate looked as if she would
have made, in the eye of the statuary, an exquisite model of beautiful
disdain--provoked by the bare idea even, and put forward, as she knew,
in raillery only. "You know, Charles," said she at length, calmly, her
features relaxing into a smile, "that if such a wretch had ten thousand
Yattons, I would, rather than marry him--oh!"--she shuddered--"spring
from Dover cliff into the sea!"

"Ah, Kate, Kate!" exclaimed her brother, with a look of infinite pride
and fondness. "Even supposing for a moment that you had no prev"----

"Come, Charles, no more nonsense," said Kate, patting his cheek, and
slightly coloring.

"I say, that even if"----

"Only fancy," interrupted Kate, "_Lady Cecilia_--TITMOUSE! I see her
before me now. Well, I protest it is positively insufferable; I could
not have thought that there was a woman in the whole world--why"--she
paused, and added laughingly, "how I should like to see their
correspondence!"

"What!" said Mrs. Aubrey, with a sly smile, first at her husband, and
then at Kate, "as a model for a certain _other_ correspondence that I
can imagine--eh, Kate!"

"Nonsense, nonsense, Agnes!--what a provoking humor you are both in this
evening," interrupted Kate, with a slight pettishness; "what we've heard
makes _me_ melancholy enough, I assure you!"

"I suppose that about the same time that Lady Cecilia Titmouse goes to
court," said her brother, "so will the Honorable Mrs. Dela"----

"If you choose to tease me, Charles, of course I cannot help it," quoth
Kate, coloring still more; but it required no _very_ great acuteness to
detect that the topic was not excessively offensive.

"Mrs. De"----

"Have done, Charles!" said she, rising; and, putting her arm round his
neck, she pressed her fair hand on his mouth; but he pushed it aside
laughingly.

"Mrs. De--Dela--Delamere," he continued.

"I will finish it for you, Charles," said Mrs. Aubrey, "the Honorable
Mr. and Mrs. Delamere"----

"What! do _you_ turn against me too?" inquired Kate, laughing very
good-humoredly.

"I wonder what her stately Ladyship's feelings were," said Aubrey, after
a pause, "the first time that her elegant and accomplished lover
_saluted_ her!!"

"Eugh!" exclaimed both Kate and Mrs. Aubrey, in a breath, and with a
simultaneous shudder of disgust.

"I dare say poor old Lord Dreddlington's notion is, that this will be a
fine opportunity for bringing about his favorite scheme of _reuniting
the families_--Heaven save the mark!" said Mr. Aubrey, just as the
twopenny postman's knock at the door was heard; and within a few
moments' time the servant brought up-stairs a letter addressed to Mr.
Aubrey. The very first glance at its contents expelled the smile from
his countenance, and the color from his cheek: he turned, in fact, so
pale, that Mrs. Aubrey and Kate also changed color--and came and stood
with beating hearts, and suddenly suspended breath, one on each side of
him, looking over the letter while he was reading it. As I intend
presently to lay a copy of it before the reader, I shall first state a
few circumstances, which will make it appear that this same letter may
be compared to a shell thrown into a peaceful little citadel, by a
skilful, though distant and unseen engineer--in short, I mean Mr.
Gammon.




CHAPTER XII.


The astute and determined person mentioned at the close of our last
chapter, had long been bent upon securing one object--namely, access to
Mr. Aubrey's family circle, for reasons which have been already
communicated to the reader. That Mr. Aubrey was, at all events, by no
means _anxious_ for such a favor, had been long before abundantly
manifest to Gammon, and yet not in a way to give him any legitimate, or
excusable, grounds of offence. The Aubreys had, he acknowledged, and
especially in their present circumstances, an unquestionable right to
receive or reject, as they thought fit, any overtures to acquaintance.
Nothing, he felt, could be more unexceptionably courteous than Mr.
Aubrey's demeanor; yet had it been such as to satisfy him, that unless
he resorted to some means of unusual efficacy, he never could get upon
visiting terms with the Aubreys. The impression which Miss Aubrey had
originally produced in his mind, remained as distinct and vivid as ever.
Her beauty, her grace, her elevated character, (of which he had heard
much on all hands,) her accomplishments, her high birth--all were
exquisitely appreciated by him, and conspired to constitute a prize, for
the gaining of which he deemed no exertion too great, no sacrifice too
serious, no enterprise too hazardous. He had, moreover, other most
important objects in view, to which a union with Miss Aubrey was in fact
essential. She was, again, the only person, the sight of whom had in any
measure given vitality to his marble heart, exciting totally new
thoughts and desires, such as stimulated him to a fierce and inflexible
determination to succeed in his purposes. He was, in short, prepared to
make almost any sacrifice, to wait any length of time, to do or suffer
anything that man could do or suffer, whether derogatory to his personal
honor or not--in order either to secure the affections of Miss Aubrey,
or, at all events, her consent to a union with him. Having early
discovered the spot where Mr. Aubrey had fixed his residence, Mr. Gammon
had made a point of lying in wait on a Sunday morning, for the purpose
of ascertaining the church to which they went; and having succeeded, he
became a constant, an impassioned, though an unseen observer of Miss
Aubrey, from whom he seldom removed his eyes during the service. But
this was to him a highly unsatisfactory state of things: he seemed, in
fact, not to have made, nor to be likely to make, the least progress
towards the accomplishment of his wishes, though much time had already
passed away. He was so deeply engrossed with the affairs of
Titmouse--which required his presence very frequently at Yatton, and a
great deal of his attention in town--as to prevent his taking any
decisive steps for some time in the matter nearest his heart. At length,
not having seen or heard anything of Mr. Aubrey for some weeks, during
which he--Gammon--had been in town, he resolved on a new stroke of
policy.

"Mr. Quirk," said he one day to his excellent senior partner, "I fancy
you will say that I am come to flatter you; but, Heaven knows!--if there
_is_ a man on the earth with whom I lay aside disguise, that man is my
friend Mr. Quirk. Really, it does seem, and mortifying enough it is to
own it, as if events invariably showed that you are right--that I am
wrong"--(Here Mr. Quirk's appearance might have suggested the idea of a
great old tom-cat who is rubbed down the right way of the fur, and does
everything he can to testify the delight it gives him, by pressing
against the person who affords him such gratification,)--"especially in
financial matters"----

"Ah, Gammon, Gammon! you're really past finding out!--Sometimes, now, I
declare I fancy you the very keenest dog going in such matters, and at
other times, eh?--not _particularly_ brilliant. When you've seen as much
of this world's villany, Gammon, as I have, you'll find it as necessary
as I have found it, to lay aside one's--one's--I say--to lay aside all
scrup----that is--I mean--one's _fine feelings_, and so forth; you
understand, Gammon?"

"Perfectly, Mr. Quirk"----

"Well--and may I ask, Gammon, what is the particular occasion of that
screwed-up forehead of yours? Something in the wind?"

"Only this, Mr. Quirk--I begin to suspect that I did very wrong in
recommending you to give an indefinite time to that Mr. Aubrey for
payment of the heavy balance he owes us--by Heavens!--see how coolly he
treats us!"

"Indeed, Gammon, I think so!--Besides--_'tis_ an uncommon heavy balance
to owe so long, eh?--Fifteen hundred pounds, or thereabouts?--Gad, it's
_that_, at least!"--Gammon shrugged his shoulders and bowed, as if
resigned to any step which Mr. Quirk might think proper to take.

"He's a villanous proud fellow, that Aubrey, eh?--Your tip-top debtors
generally _are_, though--when they've got a bit of a hardship to harp
upon"----

"Certainly we ought, when we had him in our power"----

"Ah!--D'ye recollect, Gammon? the _thumbscrew_? eh? whose fault was it
that it wasn't put on? eh? Tell me that, friend Gammon! Are you coming
round to old Caleb Quirk's matter-of-fact way of doing business? Depend
on't, the old boy has got a trick or two left in him yet, gray as his
hair's grown."

"I bow, my dear sir--I own myself worsted--and all through that absurd
weakness I have, which some choose to call"----

"Oh Lord, Gammon! Bubble, bubble and botheration--ah, ha!--Come, there's
nobody here but you and me--and eh? _old Bogy_ perhaps--so, why that
little bit of blarney?"

"Oh! my dear Mr. Quirk, spare me that cutting irony of yours. Surely
when I have made the sincere and humiliating submission to which you
have been listening--but, to return to business. I assure you that I
think we ought to lose not a moment in getting in our balance, or at
least coming to some satisfactory and definite arrangement concerning
it. Only pinch him, and he'll bleed freely, depend on it."

"Ah, ha! Pinch him, and he'll bleed! That's _my_ thunder, Gammon, ah,
ha, ha!--By Jove! that's it to a T!--I always thought the fellow had
blood enough in him if we only squeezed him a little. So let Snap be off
and have a writ out against Master Aubrey."

"Forgive me, my dear Mr. Quirk," interrupted Gammon, blandly--"we must
go very cautiously to work, or we shall only injure ourselves, and
prejudice our most important--and _permanent_ interests. We must take
care not to drive him desperate, poor devil, or he may take the benefit
of the act, and"----

"What a cursed scamp he would be to"----

"Certainly; but _we_ should suffer more than he"----

"Surely, Gammon, they'd _remand_ him! Eighteen months at the very
least."

"Not an hour--not a minute, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, very earnestly.

"The deuce they wouldn't? Well, Law's come to a pretty point! And so
lenient as we've been!"

"What occurs to _me_ as the best method of procedure," said Gammon,
after musing for a moment--"is, for you to write a letter to him
immediately--civil but peremptory--just one of those letters of yours,
my dear sir, in which no living man can excel you--_suaviter in modo,
fortiter in re_, Mr. Quirk."

"Gammon, you're a gentleman, every inch of you--you are, upon my soul!
If there _is_ one thing in which I----but _you're_ a hand at a letter of
that sort, too! And _you_ have managed these people hitherto; why not go
on to the end of the chapter?"

"Mr. Quirk, I look upon this letter as rather an important one--it ought
to come from the head of the firm, and to be decisively and skilfully
expressed, so as at once to----eh? but you know exactly what ought to be
done."

"Well--leave it to me,--leave it to me, Gammon: I think I _do_ know how
to draw up a teaser--egad! You can just cast your eye over it as soon
as"----

"If I return in time from Clerkenwell, I will, Mr. Quirk," replied
Gammon, who had, however, determined not to disable himself from saying
with literal truth that he had not seen one line of the letter which
might be sent! and, moreover, resolving to make his appearance at Mr.
Aubrey's almost immediately after he should, in the course of the post,
have received Mr. Quirk's communication:--with every appearance and
_expression_ of distress, agitation, and even disgust; indignantly
assuring Mr. Aubrey that the letter had been sent without Mr. Gammon's
knowledge--against his will--and was entirely repudiated by him; and
that he would take care, at all hazards to himself, to frustrate any
designs on the part of his coarse and hard-hearted senior partner to
harass or oppress Mr. Aubrey. With this explanation of precedent
circumstances, I proceed to lay before the reader an exact copy of the
elegant letter of that old cat's-paw, Mr. Quirk, to Mr. Aubrey, the
arrival of which had produced the sensation to which I have already
alluded.

                                  "_Saffron Hill, 30th September 18--._

     "SIR,--We trust you will excuse our reminding you of the very large
     balance (£1,446, 14s. 6d.) still remaining due upon our
     account--and which we understood, at the time when the very
     favorable arrangement to you, with respect to Mr. Titmouse, was
     made, was to have been long before this liquidated. Whatever
     allowances we might have felt disposed, on account of your peculiar
     situation, to have made, (and which we _have_ made,) we cannot but
     feel a little surprised at your having allowed several months to
     elapse without making any allusion thereto. We are satisfied,
     however, that you require only to be reminded thereof, to have your
     immediate attention directed thereto, and to act in that way that
     will conduce to liquidate our very heavy balance against you. We
     are sorry to have to press you; but being much pressed ourselves
     with serious outlays, we are obliged to throw ourselves (however
     reluctantly) upon our resources; and it gives us pleasure to
     anticipate, that you must by this time have made those arrangements
     that will admit of your immediate attention to our over-due
     account, and that will render unnecessary our resorting to hostile
     and compulsory proceedings of that extremely painful description
     that we have always felt extremely reluctant to, particularly with
     those gentlemen that would feel it very disagreeable. We trust that
     in a week's time we shall hear from you to that effect, that will
     render unnecessary our proceeding to extremities against you, which
     would be extremely painful to us.--We remain, sir, yours, most
     obediently,

                                                 "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP.

      "CHARLES AUBREY, ESQ.

     "P. S.--We should have no objection, if it would materially relieve
     you, to take your note of hand for the aforesaid balance (£1,446,
     14s. 6d.) at two months, with interest, and good security. Or say,
     £800 down in two months, and a _warrant of attorney_ for the
     remainder, at two months more."

As soon as they had finished reading the above letter, in the way I have
described, Mrs. Aubrey threw her arms round her silent and oppressed
husband's neck, and Kate, her bosom heaving with agitation, returned to
her seat without uttering a word.

"My own poor Charles!" faltered Mrs. Aubrey, and wept.

"Never mind, Charles--let us hope that we shall get through even
_this_," commenced Kate; when her emotion prevented her proceeding. Mr.
Aubrey appeared to cast his eye again, but mechanically only, over the
dry, civil, heart-breaking letter.

"Don't distress yourself, my Agnes," said he, tenderly, placing her
beside him, with his arm round her--"it is only reasonable that these
people should ask for what is their own; and if their manner is a little
coarse"----

"Oh, I've no patience, Charles!--it's the letter of a vulgar,
hard-hearted fellow," sobbed Mrs. Aubrey.

"Yes--they are wretches!--cruel harpies!" quoth Kate,
passionately--"they know that you have almost beggared yourself to pay
off by far the greater part of their abominable bill; and that you are
slaving day and night to enable you to"----here her agitation was so
excessive as to prevent her uttering another word.

"I must write and tell them," said Aubrey, calmly but with a countenance
laden with gloom--"it is all I can do--that if they will _have patience
with me, I will pay them all_."

"Oh, they'll put you in prison, Charles, directly"--said Kate, almost
frantically; and rising, she threw herself into his arms, and kissed him
with a sort of frenzied energy. "We're _very_ miserable, Charles--are we
not? It's hard to bear indeed," she continued, gazing with agonizing
intensity on his troubled features. Mrs. Aubrey wept in silence.

"Are you giving way, my brave Kate, beneath this sudden and momentary
gust on the midnight sea of our trouble?" inquired her brother, proudly
but kindly gazing at her, and with his hand gently pushing from her pale
cheeks her disordered hair.

"Human nature, Charles, must not be tried too far--look at Agnes, and
the darling little loves"----

"I am not likely to consult their interests, Kate, by yielding to
unmanly emotion--am I, sweet Agnes?" She made him no reply, but shook
her head, sobbing bitterly.

"Pray what do you think, Charles, of your friend _Mr. Gammon_, now?"
inquired Kate, suddenly and scornfully. "Oh, the smooth-tongued villain!
I've always hated him!"

"I must say there's something about his eye that is anything but
pleasing," said Mrs. Aubrey; "and so I thought when I saw him at York
for a moment."

"He's a hypocrite, Charles--depend upon it, and in this letter he has
thrown off the mask"--interrupted Kate.

"But _is_ it _his_ letter? How do we know that he has had anything to do
with it?" inquired her brother, calmly--"It is much more probable that
it is the production of old Mr. Quirk alone, for whom Mr. Gammon has, I
know, a profound contempt. The handwriting is Mr. Quirk's; the style is
assuredly not Mr. Gammon's; and the whole tone of the communication is
such as satisfies me that neither was the composition of the letter, nor
the idea of sending it, his; besides, he has really shown on every
occasion a straightforward and disinterested"----

"Oh, Charles, it is very weak of you to be so hood-winked by such a
fellow; I shudder to think of him! One of these days, Charles, you will
be of my opinion, and recollect what I now say!"--While she thus spoke,
and Mrs. Aubrey was, with a trembling hand, preparing tea, a double
knock was heard at the street door.

"Heavens, Charles! who can that possibly be, and at this time of night?"
exclaimed Kate, with alarmed energy.

"I really cannot conjecture"--replied Mr. Aubrey, with an agitation of
manner which he found it impossible to conceal--"we've certainly but
very few visitors--and it is so late." The servant in a few minutes
terminated their suspense, and occasioned them nearly equal alarm and
amazement, by laying down on the table a card bearing the name of MR.
GAMMON.

"Mr. Gammon!" exclaimed all three, in a breath, looking apprehensively
at each other--"Is he _alone_?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, with forced
calmness.

"Yes, sir."

"Show him into the study, then," replied Mr. Aubrey, "and say I will be
with him in a few moments' time."

"Dear Charles, don't, dearest, think of going down," said his wife and
sister, with excessive alarm and agitation; "desire him to send up his
message."

"No, I shall go and see him, and at once," replied Mr. Aubrey, taking
one of the candles.

"For Heaven's sake, Charles, mind what you say to the man: he will watch
every word you utter. And, dearest, don't stay long; consider what
tortures we shall be in!" said poor Mrs. Aubrey, accompanying him to the
door, and trembling from head to foot.

"Rely on my prudence, and also that I shall not stop long," he replied;
and descending the stairs, he entered the study. In a chair near the
little book-strewn table sat his dreaded visitor--suggesting to his
disturbed vision the idea of a deadly snake coiled up before him.
Instantly, on seeing Mr. Aubrey, Gammon rose, with distress and
agitation visible in his countenance and deportment. Mr. Aubrey, with
calmness and dignity, begged him to resume his seat; and when he had
done so, sat down opposite to him, with a sternly inquisitive look,
awaiting his visitor's errand. He was not kept long in suspense.

"Oh, Mr. Aubrey!" commenced Mr. Gammon, with a somewhat tremulous voice,
"I perceive, from your manner, that my fears are justified, and that I
am an intruder--a dishonorable and hypocritical one I must indeed
appear; but, as I have done nothing to forfeit my right to be treated as
should be one gentleman by another, I request you to hear me. This visit
appears indeed unseasonable; but, late this afternoon, I made a
discovery which has shocked me severely, nay, I may say, disgusted me
beyond expression. Am I right, Mr. Aubrey, in supposing that this
evening you have received a letter from Mr. Quirk, and about the balance
due on our account?"

"I have, sir," replied Mr. Aubrey, coldly.

"I thought as much," muttered Gammon, with suppressed
vehemence--"execrable, heartless, sordid old----And he _knew_,"
continued Gammon, addressing Mr. Aubrey in an indignant tone, "that my
word was solemnly pledged to you."

"I have no intention of making any complaint, or uttering any
reproaches, sir," said Mr. Aubrey, eying his agitated companion
searchingly.

"But _I_ have, Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, haughtily. "My senior partner
has broken faith with me. Sir, you have already paid more than will
cover what is justly due to us; and I recommend you, after this, to
_have the bill taxed_. You will thereby get rid of every farthing of the
balance now demanded; and I give you this recommendation _bonâ fide_,
and upon the honor of a gentleman." Notwithstanding the air of sincerity
with which this was uttered, a cold thrill of apprehension and suspicion
passed through Mr. Aubrey's heart, and he felt confident that some
subtle and dangerous manœuvre was being practised upon him--that he
was urged to take some hostile step for instance--which would be
unsuccessful, and yet afford a pretext to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap, to treat him as one guilty of a breach of faith, and _warrant them
in proceeding to extremities_. He regarded Mr. Gammon's words as the
hissing of a serpent, and shuddered.

"I have no intention, sir, to do anything of the kind," said Mr. Aubrey.
"The original agreement between us was, that your bill should not be
taxed. I adhere to it; and whatever course you may feel disposed to
adopt, I shall take no steps whatever of the kind you mention. At the
same time it is utterly impossible for me to pay"----

"Mr. Aubrey!" interrupted Gammon, imploringly.

"And what you do intend to do, for Heaven's sake, sir, do quickly, and
keep me not in suspense."

"I perceive, Mr. Aubrey, that notwithstanding what I have said, I am
distrusted," replied Gammon, with a somewhat proud and peremptory tone
and manner.--"I excuse it; you are justly irritated, and have been
insulted: so have I, too, sir; and I choose to repeat to you, upon my
sacred word of honor as a gentleman, and in the sight of Heaven, that I
entirely disown and scout this whole procedure; that I never knew
anything about it till, accidentally, I discovered lying on Mr. Quirk's
desk, after his departure this evening from the office, a rough draft of
a letter which I presumed you had received; especially as, on a strict
inquiry of the clerks, I found that a letter had been put into the post,
addressed to you. Nay, more; Mr. Quirk, whose rapacity increases--I
grieve to own--with his years, has been for many weeks harassing me
about this detestable business, and urging me to consent, but in vain,
to such an application as he has now meanly made behind my back,
regardless of the injury it was calculated to do my feelings, and,
indeed, the doubt it must throw over my sincerity and honor, which I
prize infinitely beyond life itself. Only a fortnight ago, Mr. Aubrey,
this old man solemnly pledged himself," continued Gammon, with
suppressed fury, "never to mention the matter to either me or you,
again, for at least a couple of years, unless something extraordinary
should intervene!--If the letter which you have received be a transcript
of the rough draft which I have read, it is a vulgar, unfeeling, brutal
letter, and contains, moreover--for why should I keep faith with even my
senior partner, who has so outrageously broken faith with me?--two or
three wilfully false statements. I therefore feel it due to myself to
disavow all participation in this miserable product of fraud and
extortion--and if you still distrust me, I can only regret it, but shall
not presume to find fault with you for it. I am half disposed, on
account of this, and one or two other things which have happened, to
close my connection with Mr. Quirk from this day--forever. He and I have
nothing in common; and the species of business which he and Mr. Snap
chiefly court and relish, is perfectly odious to me. But if I should
continue in the firm, I will undertake to supply you with one pretty
conclusive evidence of my sincerity and truth in what I have been saying
to you--namely, that on the faith and honor of a gentleman, you may
depend upon hearing no more of this matter from any member of our firm,
except from me, and that at a very remote period. Let the _event_, Mr.
Aubrey, speak for itself."--While Gammon was speaking with eloquent
earnestness and fervor, he had felt Mr. Aubrey's eye fixed on him with
an expression of stern incredulity--which, however, he at length
perceived, with infinite inward relief and pleasure, to be giving way as
he went on.

"Certainly, Mr. Gammon"--said Mr. Aubrey, in a very different tone and
manner from that which he had till then adopted--"I will not disguise
from you that the letter you have mentioned, has occasioned me--and my
family--deep distress and dismay; for it is utterly out of my power to
comply with its requisitions: and if it be intended to be really acted
on, and followed up"--he paused, and with difficulty repressed his
emotions, "all my little plans are forever frustrated--and I am at your
mercy--to go to prison, if you choose, and there end my days."--He
paused--his lip trembled, and his eyes were for a moment obscured with
starting tears. So also was it with Mr. Gammon, who looked for some time
aside. "But,"--resumed Mr. Aubrey,--"after the explicit and voluntary
assurance which you have given me, I feel it impossible not to give you
implicit credence. I can imagine no motive for what would be otherwise
such elaborate and dreadful deception!"

"_Motive_, Mr. Aubrey! The only motive I am conscious of, is one
supplied by profound sympathy for your misfortunes--admiration of your
character--and my sole object is, your speedy extrication from your very
serious embarrassments. I am in the habit, Mr. Aubrey," he continued in
a lower tone, "of concealing and checking my feelings--but there _are_
occasions"--he paused, and added with a somewhat faltering voice--"Mr.
Aubrey, it pains me inexpressibly to observe that your anxieties--your
severe exertions--I trust in God I may not rightly add, your
_privations_--are telling on your appearance. You are certainly much
thinner." It was impossible any longer to distrust the sincerity of Mr.
Gammon--to withstand the arts of this consummate actor. Mr. Aubrey held
out long, but at length surrendered entirely, and fully believed all
that Gammon had said:--entertaining, moreover, commensurate feelings of
_gratitude_, towards one who had done so much to protect him from
rapacious avarice, and the ruin into which it would have precipitated
him; and of _respect_, for one who had evinced such an anxious,
scrupulous, and sensitive jealousy for his own honor and reputation, and
resolute determination to vindicate it against suspicion. Subsequent
conversation served to strengthen his favorable disposition towards
Gammon, and the same effect was also produced when he adverted to his
previous and unwarrantable distrust and disbelief of that gentleman. He
looked fatigued and harassed; it was growing late; he had come, on his
errand of courtesy and kindness, a great distance: why should not Mr.
Aubrey ask him up-stairs, to join them at tea? To be sure, Mr. Aubrey
had hitherto felt a disinclination--he scarce knew why--to have any more
than mere business intercourse with Mr. Gammon, a member of such a firm
as Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--and, moreover, Mr. Runnington had more than
once let fall expressions indicative of vehement suspicion of Mr.
Gammon; so had the Attorney-General; but what had Gammon's _conduct_
been? Had it not practically given the lie to such insinuations and
distrust, unless Mr. Aubrey was to own himself incapable of forming a
judgment on a man's line of conduct which had been so closely watched as
that of Gammon, by himself, Aubrey? Then Miss Aubrey had ever, and
especially that very evening--expressed an intense dislike of Mr.
Gammon--had avowed, also, her early and uniform disgust--'twould be
extremely embarrassing to her suddenly to introduce into her presence
such an individual as Gammon: again, he had promised to return quickly,
in order to relieve their anxiety: why should he not have the
inexpressible gratification of letting Mr. Gammon himself, in his own
pointed and impressive manner, dispel all their fears? He would,
probably, not stay long.

"Mr. Gammon," said he, having balanced for some moments these
conflicting considerations in his mind, "there are only Mrs. Aubrey, and
my sister, Miss Aubrey, up-stairs. I am sure they will be happy to see
me return to them in time for tea, accompanied by the bearer of such
agreeable tidings as yours. Mr. Quirk's letter, to be frank, reached me
when in their presence, and we all read it together, and were distressed
and confounded at its contents." After a faint show of reluctance to
trespass on the ladies so suddenly, and at so late an hour, Mr. Gammon
slipped off his great-coat, and with intense but suppressed feelings of
exultation at the success of his scheme, followed Mr. Aubrey up-stairs.
He was not a little flustered on entering the room and catching a first
glimpse of the two lovely women--and one of them _Miss Aubrey_--sitting
in it, their faces turned with eager interest and apprehension towards
the door, as he made his appearance. He observed that both of them
started, and turned excessively pale.

"Let me introduce to you," said Mr. Aubrey, quickly, and with a bright
assuring smile, "a gentleman who has kindly called to relieve us all
from great anxiety--Mr. Gammon: Mr. Gammon, Mrs. Aubrey--Miss Aubrey."
Mr. Gammon bowed with an air of deep deference, but with easy
self-possession; his soul thrilling within him at the sight of her whose
image had never been from before his eyes since they had first seen her.

"I shall trespass on you for only a few minutes, ladies," said he,
diffidently, approaching the chair towards which he was motioned. "I
could not resist the opportunity so politely afforded me by Mr. Aubrey
of paying my compliments here, and personally assuring you of my utter
abhorrence of the mercenary and oppressive conduct of a person with
whom, alas! I am closely connected in business, and whose letter to you
of this evening I only casually became acquainted with, a few moments
before starting off hither. Forget it, ladies; I pledge my honor that it
shall _never be acted on_!" This he said with a fervor of manner that
could not but make an impression on those whom he addressed.

"I'm sure we are happy to see you, Mr. Gammon, and very much obliged to
you, indeed," said Mrs. Aubrey, with a sweet smile, and a face from
which alarm was vanishing fast. Miss Aubrey said nothing; her brilliant
eyes glanced with piercing anxiety, now at her brother, then at his
companion. Gammon felt that he was distrusted. Nothing could be more
prepossessing--more bland and insinuating, without a trace of
fulsomeness, than his manner and address, as he took his seat between
these two agitated but lovely women. Miss Aubrey's paleness rather
suddenly gave way to a vivid and beautiful flush; and her eyes presently
sparkled with delighted surprise on perceiving the relieved air of her
brother, and the apparent cordiality and sincerity of Mr. Gammon. When
she reflected, moreover, on her expressions of harshness and severity
concerning him that very evening, and of which he now appeared so
undeserving, it threw into her manner towards him a sort of delicate and
charming embarrassment. Her ear drank in eagerly every word he uttered,
so pointed, so significant, so full of earnest good-will towards her
brother. Their visitor's manner was that of a gentleman; his countenance
and conversation were those of a man of intellect. Was _this_ the keen
and cruel pettifogger whom she had learned at once to dread and to
despise? They and he were, in a word, completely at their ease with one
another, within a few minutes after he had taken his seat at the
tea-table. Miss Aubrey's beauty shone that evening with even unwonted
lustre, and appeared as if it had not been in the least impaired by the
anguish of mind which she had so long suffered. 'Tis quite impossible
for me to do justice to the expression of her full beaming blue eyes--an
expression of mingled passion and intellect--of blended softness and
spirit--such as, especially in conjunction with the rich tones of her
voice, shed something like madness into the breast of Gammon. She, as
well as her lovely sister-in-law, was dressed in mourning, which
infinitely set off her dazzling complexion, and, simple and elegant in
its drapery, displayed her exquisite proportions to the greatest
possible advantage. "Oh, my God!" thought Gammon, with a momentary
thrill of disgust and horror: "and this is the transcendent creature of
whom that little miscreant, Titmouse, spoke to me in terms of such
presumptuous and revolting license!" What would he not have given to
kiss the fair and delicate white hand which passed to him his antique
tea-cup! Then Gammon's thoughts turned for a moment inward--_why, what a
scoundrel was he_! At that instant he was, as it were, reeking with his
recent lie. He was there on cruel, false pretences, which alone had
secured him access into that little drawing-room, and brought him into
contiguity with the dazzling beauty beside him--pure, and innocent as
beautiful;--he was a fiend beside an angel. What an execrable hypocrite
was he! He caught, on that memorable occasion, a sudden glimpse even of
his own real inner man--of his infernal SELFISHNESS and HYPOCRISY--and
involuntarily shuddered! Yes--he was striving to fascinate his
_victims_!--those whom he was fast pressing on to the verge of
destruction--against whom he was, at that moment, meditating profound
and subtle schemes of mischief! At length they all got into animated
conversation.

Though infinitely charmed by the unaffected simplicity and frankness of
their manners, he experienced a sad and painful consciousness at not
having made the least _way_ with them. Though physically near to them,
he seemed yet really at an unapproachable distance--and particularly
from Miss Aubrey. He felt that the courtesy bestowed upon him was
accidental, the result merely of his present position, and of the
intelligence which he had come to communicate. It was not
_personal_--'twas nothing to _Gammon himself_; it would never be
renewed, unless he should renew his device! There was not the faintest
semblance of _sympathy_ between them and him. Fallen as they were into a
lower sphere, they had yet about them, so to speak, a certain atmosphere
of conscious personal consequence, derived from high birth and
breeding--from superior feelings and associations--from a native
frankness and dignity of character, which was indestructible and
inalienable; and which chilled and checked undue advances of any sort.
They were still the Aubreys of Yatton, and he in their presence, still
Mr. Gammon of the firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, of Saffron Hill--and
all this, too, without--on the part of the Aubreys--the least effort,
the least intention, or even consciousness. No, there had not been
exhibited towards him the faintest indication of hauteur. On the
contrary, he had been treated with perfect cordiality and frankness.
Yet, dissatisfaction and vexation were, he scarce knew at the moment
why, pervading his whole soul. Had he accurately analyzed his own
feelings he would have discovered the real clause--_in his own
unreasonable, unjustifiable wishes and intentions_! But to return, they
talked of Titmouse, and his mode of life and conduct--of his expected
alliance with the Lady Cecilia, at the mention of which Gammon's quick
eye detected a passing smile of scorn on Miss Aubrey's fine countenance,
that was _death to all his own fond and ambitious hopes_. After he had
been sitting with them for scarcely an hour, he detected Miss Aubrey
stealthily glancing at her watch, and at once arose to take his
departure with a very easy and graceful air, expressing an apprehension
that he had trespassed upon their kindness. He was cordially assured to
the contrary; but at the same time was not invited either to prolong
his stay, or renew his visit. Miss Aubrey made him, he thought, as he
inclined towards her, _rather_ a formal courtesy; and the tone of
voice--soft and silvery--in which she said "good-night, Mr. Gammon,"
fell on his eager ear, and sank into his vexed heart, like music. On
quitting the house, a deep sigh of disappointment escaped him. As he
gazed for a moment with longing eyes at the windows of the room in which
Miss Aubrey was sitting, he felt profound depression of spirit. He had
altogether _failed_; and he had a sort of insupportable consciousness
that he deserved to fail, on every account. Her image was before his
mind's eye every moment while he was threading his way back to his
chambers in Thavies' Inn. He sat for an hour or two before the remnant
of his fire, lost in a revery; and sleep came not to his eyes till a
very late hour in the morning.

Just as the tortuous mind of Gammon was loosing hold of its sinister
purposes in sleep, Mr. Aubrey might have been seen taking his seat in
his little study, having himself spent a restless night. 'Twas little
more than half-past four o'clock when he entered, candle in hand, the
scene of his early and cheerful labors, and sat down before his table,
which was covered with loose manuscripts and books. His face was
certainly overcast with anxiety, but his soul was calm and resolute.
Having lit his fire, he placed his shaded candle upon the table, and
leaning back for a moment in his chair, while the flickering increasing
light of his crackling fire and of the candle, revealed to him, with a
sense of indescribable snugness, his shelves crammed with books, and the
window covered with an ample crimson curtain, effectually excluding the
chill morning air--he reflected with a heavy sigh upon the precarious
tenure by which he held the little comforts yet thus left to him. Oh,
thought he--if Providence saw fit to relieve me from the frightful
pressure of liability under which I am bound to the earth, at what
labor, at what privation would I repine! What gladness would not spring
up in my heart!--But rousing himself from vain thoughts of this kind, he
began to arrange his manuscripts; when his ear caught a sound on the
stair--'twas the light stealthy step of his sister, coming down to
perform her promised undertaking--not an unusual one by any means--to
transcribe for the press the manuscript which he expected to complete
that morning. "My sweet Kate," said he, tenderly, as she entered with
her little chamber light, extinguishing it as she entered,--"I am really
grieved to see you stirring so early--do, dearest Kate--go back to bed."
But she kissed his cheek affectionately, and refused to do any such
thing; and telling him of the restless night she had passed, of which
indeed her pale and depressed features bore but too legible evidence,
she sat herself down in her accustomed place, nearly opposite to him;
gently cleared away space enough for her little desk, and then opening
it, was presently engaged in her delightful task--for to her it _was_
indeed delightful--of copying out her brother's composition. Thus she
sat, silent and industrious--scarce opening her lips, except to ask him
to explain an illegible word or so--opposite to her doting brother, till
the hour had arrived--eight o'clock--for the close of their morning
toil. The reader will be pleased to hear that the article on which they
had been thus engaged--and which was the discussion of a question of
foreign politics, of great difficulty and importance--produced him a
check for sixty guineas, and excited general attention and admiration.
Oh, how precious was this reward of his honorable and severe toil! How
it cheered him who had earned it, and those who were, alas! entirely
dependent upon his exertions! And how sensibly, too, it augmented their
little means! Grateful, indeed, were all of them for the success which
had attended his labors!

As I do not intend to occupy the reader with any details relating to Mr.
Aubrey's Temple avocations, I shall content myself with saying that the
more Mr. Weasel and Mr. Aubrey came to know of each other, the more
Aubrey respected his legal knowledge and ability, and he, Aubrey's
intellectual energy and successful application; which, indeed,
consciously brought home to Aubrey its own reward, in the daily
acquisition of solid learning, and increasing facility in the use of it.
His mind was formed for THINGS, and was not apt to occupy itself with
mere _words_, or technicalities. He was ever in quest of the principles
of law--of its reason, and spirit. He quickly began to appreciate the
sound practical good sense on which almost all its chief rules are
founded, and the effectual manner in which they are accommodated to the
innumerable and ever-varying exigencies of human affairs. The mere forms
and technicalities of the law, Mr. Aubrey often thought might be
compared to short-hand, whose characters to the uninitiated appear
quaint and useless, but are perfectly invaluable to him who has seen the
object, and patiently acquired the use of them. Whatever Mr. Aubrey's
hand found to do, while studying the law, he did it, indeed, _with his
might_--which is the grand secret of the difference in the success of
different persons addressing themselves to legal studies. Great or
small, easy or difficult, simple or complicated, interesting or
uninteresting, as might be the affair submitted to him, he made a point
of mastering it thoroughly, and, as far as possible, _by his own
efforts_; which generated, early, a habit of self-reliance which no one
better than he knew the value of--how inestimable, how indispensable,
not to the lawyer merely, but to any one intrusted with the responsible
management of affairs. In short, he secured that satisfaction and
success which are sure to attend the exertions of a man of superior
sense and spirit, who is in earnest about that which he has undertaken.
He frequently surprised Mr. Weasel with the exactness and extent of his
legal information--with his acuteness, clear-headedness, and tenacity in
dealing with matters of downright difficulty: and Mr. Weasel had once or
twice an opportunity of expressing his very flattering opinion
concerning Mr. Aubrey to the Attorney-General. The mention of that
eminent person reminds me of an observation which I intended to have
made some time ago. The reader is not to imagine, from my silence upon
the subject, that Mr. Aubrey, in his fallen fortunes, was heartlessly
forgotten or neglected by the distinguished friends and associates of
former and more prosperous days. It was not they who withdrew from him,
but he who withdrew from them; and that, too, of set purpose, resolutely
adhered to, on the ground that it could not be otherwise, without
seriously interfering with the due prosecution of those plans of life on
which depended not only his _all_, and that of those connected with
him--but his fond hopes of yet extricating himself, by his own personal
exertions, from the direful difficulties and dangers which at present
environed him--of achieving, with his own right hand, independence. Let
me not forget here to state a fact which I conceive infinitely to
redound to poor Aubrey's honor--viz. that he thrice refused offers made
him from very high quarters, of considerable _sinecures, i. e._ handsome
salaries for purely nominal services--which he was earnestly and
repeatedly reminded would at once afford him a liberal maintenance, and
leave the whole of his time at his own disposal, to follow any pursuit
or profession which he chose. Mr. Aubrey justly considered that it was
very difficult, if not indeed impossible, for any honorable and
high-minded man to be a sinecurist.--He who holds a sinecure, is, in my
opinion, plundering the public; and how it can be more contrary to the
dictates of honor and justice, deliberately to defraud an individual,
than deliberately and audaciously to defraud that collection of
individuals called the public, let casuists determine. As for Mr.
Aubrey, _he_ saw stretching before him the clear, straight, bright line
of honor, and resolved to follow it, without faltering or wavering, come
what come might. He resolved that, with the blessing of Providence, his
own exertions should procure his bread, and, if such was the will of
Heaven, lead him to distinction among mankind. He had formed this
determination, and resolved to work it out--never to pause, nor give
way, but to die in the struggle. Such a spirit must conquer whatever is
opposed to it. What is _difficulty_? Only a word indicating the degree
of strength requisite for accomplishing particular objects; a mere
notice of the necessity for exertion; a bugbear to children and fools;
an effective stimulus to men.

Mr. Gammon experienced little trouble in wheedling Mr. Quirk out of his
purpose of enforcing payment, by Mr. Aubrey, of the balance of his
account; demonstrating to the old gentleman the policy of waiting a
little longer. He pledged himself, when the proper time came, to adopt
measures of undoubted efficacy--assuring his for some time sullen
senior, in a low tone, that since his letter had reached Mr. Aubrey,
circumstances had occurred which would render it in the last degree
dangerous to press that gentleman upon the subject. What that was, which
had happened, Mr. Gammon, as usual, refused to state. This was a
considerable source of vexation to Mr. Quirk: but he had a far greater
one, in the decisive and final overthrow of his fondly-cherished hopes
concerning his daughter's alliance with Titmouse. The paragraph in the
_Aurora_, announcing Mr. Titmouse's engagement to his brilliant
relative, the Lady Cecilia, had emanated from the pen of Mr. Gammon; who
had had several objects in view in giving early publicity to the event.
_Happening_(!) on the morning on which it appeared, to be glancing over
the fascinating columns of the _Aurora_ at a public office, (the paper
taken in at their own establishment being the _Morning Growl_,) he made
a point of purchasing that day's _Aurora_; and on returning to Saffron
Hill, he inquired whether Mr. Quirk were at home. Hearing that he was
sitting alone, in his room--in rushed Mr. Gammon, breathless with
surprise and haste, and plucking the newspaper out of his pocket,--"By
Heavens, Mr. Quirk!"--he almost gasped as he doubled down the paper to
the place where stood the announcement in question, and put it into Mr.
Quirk's hands,--"this young fellow's given you the slip, after all!
See!--The moment that my back is turned"----

Mr. Quirk having, with a little trepidation, adjusted his spectacles,
perused the paragraph with a somewhat flushed face. He had, in fact, for
some time had grievous misgivings on the subject of his chance of
becoming the father-in-law of his distinguished client, Mr. Titmouse;
but now his faintest glimmering of hope was suddenly and completely
extinguished, and the old gentleman felt quite desolate. He looked up,
as soon as he had finished reading, and gazed ruefully at his indignant
and sympathizing companion.

"It seems all up, Gammon, certainly--don't it?" said he, faintly, with a
flustered air.

"Indeed, my dear Mr. Quirk, it does! You have my sincerest"----

"Now comes t'other end of the thing, Gammon! You know every promise of
marriage has two ends--one joins the heart, and t'other the pocket;
_out_ heart, _in_ pocket--so _have at him_, Gammon--have at him, by
Jove!" He rose up and rubbed his hands as he stood before the fire.
"Breach of promise--thundering damages--devilish deep purse--special
jury--broken heart, and all that! I wish he'd written her--by the
way--more letters! Adad, I'll have a shot at him by next assizes--a writ
on the file this very day! What d'ye think on't, friend Gammon, between
ourselves?" quoth Mr. Quirk, heatedly.

"Why, my dear sir--to tell you the truth--aren't you really well out of
it? He's a miserable little upstart--he'd have made a wretched husband
for so superior a girl as Miss Quirk."

"Ay--ay! ay! She _is_ a good girl, Gammon--there you're right; would
have made the best of wives--my eyes, (between ourselves!) how that'll
go to the jury! Gad, I fancy I see'em--perhaps all of'em daughters of
their own."

"Looking at the thing calmly, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon,
gravely--apprehensive of Mr. Quirk's carrying too far so very absurd an
affair--"where's the _evidence_ of the promise?--Because, you know,
there's certainly _something_ depends on that--eh?"

"Evidence? Deuce take you, Gammon! where are your wits? Evidence?
Lots--lots of it! A'n't there I--her father? A'n't I a competent[31]
witness? Wait and see old Caleb Quirk get into the box. I'll settle his
hash in half a minute."

"Yes--if you're believed, perhaps."

"_Believe_ be----! Who's to be believed, if her own father isn't?"

"Why, you may be too much swayed by your own feelings!"

"_Feelings_ be----! It's past all that; he has none--so he must pay, for
he _has_ cash! He ought to be made an example of!"

"Still, to come to the point, Mr. Quirk, I vow it quite _teases_
me--this matter of the evidence"----

"Evidence? Why, Lord bless my soul, Gammon," quoth Quirk, testily,
"haven't _you_ had your eyes and ears open all this while? Gad, what a
crack witness you'd make! A man of your--your intellect--serve a friend
at a pinch--and in a matter about his daughter? Ah, how often you've
seen'em together--walking, talking, laughing, dancing, riding--writ in
her album--made her presents, and she him. _Evidence?_ Oceans of it, and
to spare! Secure Subtle--and I wouldn't take £5,000 for my verdict!"

"Why, you see, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, very seriously--"though I've
striven my utmost these six months to bring it about, the artful little
scamp has never given me the least thing that I could lay hold of, and
_swear_ to."

"Oh, you'll _recollect_ enough, in due time, friend Gammon, if you'll
only turn your attention to it; and if you'll bear in mind it's life and
death to my poor girl. Oh Lord! I must get my sister to break it to her,
and I'll send sealed instructions to Mr. ---- Weasel, shall we say? or
Lynx? ay, Lynx; for he'll then have to fight for his own pleadings; and
can't turn round at the trial and say, 'this is not right,' and 'that's
wrong,' and, '_why_ didn't you have such and such evidence?' Lynx is the
man; and I'll lay the venue in Yorkshire, for Titmouse is devilish
disliked down there; and a special jury will be only too glad to give
him a desperate slap in the chops! We'll lay the damages at twenty
thousand pounds! Ah, ha! I'll teach the young villain to break the
hearts of an old man and his daughter. But, egad," he pulled out his
watch, "half-past two; and Nicky Crowbar sure to be put up at three! By
Jove! it won't do to be out of the way; he's head of the gang, and they
always come down very liberally when they're in trouble. Snap!
Amminadab! hollo! who's there? Drat them all, why don't they speak?"
The old gentleman was soon, however, attended to.

"Are they here?" he inquired, as Mr. Amminadab entered.

"Yes, sir, all three; and the coach is at the door, too. Nicky Crowbar's
to be up at three, sir"----

"I see--I know--I'm ready," replied Mr. Quirk, who was presently seated
in the coach with three gentlemen, to whom he minutely explained the
person of Mr. Nicky Crowbar, and the place at which it was quite certain
that Mr. Crowbar could _not_ have been at half-past eleven o'clock on
Tuesday night the 9th of July, seeing that it did so happen that at that
precise time he was elsewhere, in company with these very three
gentlemen--to wit, at Chelsea, and _not at Clapham_! In short, this was
a first-rate ALIBI.

Though Mr. Gammon thus sympathized with one of the gentle beings who had
been "rifled of all their sweetness," I grieve to say that the other,
Miss Tag-rag, never occupied his thoughts for one moment. He neither
knew nor cared whether or not she was apprised of the destruction of all
_her_ fond hopes, by the paragraph which had appeared in the _Aurora_.
He felt, in fact, that he had really done enough, on the part of Mr.
Titmouse, for his early friend and patron, Mr. Tag-rag, on whom the
stream of fortune had set in strong and steady; and, in short, Mr.
Gammon knew that Mr. Tag-rag had received a substantial memento of his
connection with Tittlebat Titmouse. How truly disinterested a man was
Mr. Gammon towards all with whom he came in contact! What had he not
done, as I have been saying, for the Tag-rags? What for Mr. Titmouse?
What for the Earl of Dreddlington? What for Mr. Quirk, and even Snap? As
for Mr. Quirk, had he not been put in possession of his long-coveted
bond for £10,000? of which, by the way, he allotted £1,000 only to the
man--Mr. Gammon--by whose unwearying exertions and consummate ability he
had obtained so splendid a prize, and £300 to Mr. Snap! Then, had not
Mr. Quirk also been paid his bill against Titmouse of £5,000 and
upwards, and £2,500 by Mr. Aubrey? And, governed by the articles of
their partnership, what a _lion's half_ of this spoil had not been
appropriated to the respectable old head of the firm? Mr. Gammon did
undoubtedly complain indignantly of the trifling portion allotted to
him, but he was encountered by such a desperate pertinacity on the part
of Mr. Quirk as baffled him entirely, and caused him to abandon his
further claim in disgust and despair. Thus, the £20,000 obtained by Mr.
Titmouse, on mortgage of the Yatton property, was reduced at once to the
sum of £5,000;--but out of this handsome balance had yet to come, first,
£800, with interest, due to Mr. Quirk for subsistence-money advanced to
Titmouse; secondly, £500 due to Mr. Snap, for moneys alleged to have
been also lent by him to his friend Titmouse at different times, in the
manner which has been already explained to the reader--Snap's demand for
repayment being accompanied by _verbatim_ copies--such he stated them to
be--of between forty and fifty memoranda--many of them in pencil--notes
of hand, receipts, I. O. U.'s, &c., in whose handwriting the figures
representing _the sums lent_, and the times when, could not be
ascertained, and did not signify: it being, in point of law, good _primâ
facie_ evidence for Snap, in the event of a trial, simply to produce the
documents and prove the signature of his friend Mr. Titmouse.[32] That
gentleman discharged a volley of imprecations at Snap's head, on
receiving this unexpected claim, and referred it to Mr. Gammon; who,
after subjecting it to a _bonâ fide_ and very rigorous examination,
found it in vain to attempt to resist, or even diminish it; such perfect
method and accuracy had Snap observed in his accounts, that they secured
him a clear gain of £350; the difference between that sum and £500,
being the amount actually and _bonâ fide_ advanced by him to Titmouse.
Deducting, therefore, £1,300, (the amount of the two minor demands of
£800 and £500 above specified,) there remained to Mr. Titmouse out of
the £20,000 the sum of £3,700; and he ought to have been thankful; for
he _might_ have got _nothing_--or even have been brought in debtor to
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. I say that Mr. Gammon would seem, from
the above statement of accounts, not to have been dealt with in any
degree adequately to his merits. He felt such to be his case; but soon
reconciled himself to it, occupied as he was with arduous and extensive
speculations, amid all the complication of which he never for a moment
lost sight of one object, viz.--_himself_. His schemes were boldly
conceived, and he went about the accomplishment of them with equal
patience and sagacity. Almost everything was at present going on as he
could have wished. He had contrived to place himself in a very
convenient fast-and-loose sort of position with reference to his
fellow-partners--one which admitted of his easily disengaging himself
from them, whenever the proper time should have arrived for taking such
a step. He was absolute and paramount over Titmouse, and could always
secure his instant submission, by virtue of the fearful and mysterious
talisman which he occasionally flashed before his startled eyes. He had
acquired great influence, also, over the Earl of Dreddlington--an
influence which was constantly on the increase; and had seen come to
pass an event which he judged to be of great importance to him--namely,
the engagement between Titmouse and the Lady Cecilia. Yet was there one
object which he had proposed to himself as incalculably valuable and
supremely desirable--as the consummation of all his designs and wishes;
I mean the obtaining the hand of Miss Aubrey--and in which he had yet a
fearful misgiving of failure. But he was a man whose courage rose with
every obstacle; and he fixedly resolved within himself, to succeed, at
any cost. 'Twas not alone his exquisite appreciation of her personal
beauty, her grace, her accomplishments, her lovely temper, her lofty
spirit, her high birth--objects all of them dazzling enough to a man of
such a powerful and ambitious mind, and placed in such circumstances in
life as Gammon. There were certain other considerations, intimately
involved in all his calculations, which--as may possibly become apparent
hereafter--rendered success in this affair a matter of vital
consequence--nay, indispensable. Knowing, as I do, what had passed at
different times between that proud and determined girl and her constant
and enthusiastic lover, Mr. Delamere, I am as certain as a man can be of
anything that has not actually happened, that, though she may possibly
not be fated to become Mrs. Delamere, she will certainly NEVER
become--MRS. GAMMON!--Loving Kate as I do, and being thoroughly
acquainted with Gammon, I feel deep interest in his movements, and am
watching them with great apprehension:--she, lovely, innocent,
unsuspicious; he, subtle, selfish, unscrupulous, desperate! And he has
great power in his hands: is he not silently surrounding his destined
prey with unperceived, but apparently inextricable meshes? God guard
thee, my Kate, and reward thy noble devotion to thy brother and his
fallen fortunes! Do we chide thee for clinging to them with fond
tenacity in their extremity, when thou art daily importuned to enter
into that station which thou wouldst so adorn?

Gammon's reception by the Aubreys, in Vivian Street--kind and
courteous though it had surely been--had ever since rankled in his
heart. Their abstaining from a request to him to prolong his stay, or to
renew his visit, he had noted at the time, and had ever since reflected
upon it with pique and discouragement. Nevertheless, he was resolved at
all hazards to become at least an occasional visitor in Vivian Street.
When a fortnight had elapsed without any further intimation to Mr.
Aubrey concerning the dreaded balance due to the firm, Gammon ventured
to call upon him, for the purpose of assuring Mr. Aubrey that it was no
mere temporary lull; that he might divest his mind of all uneasiness on
the subject; and of asking whether he (Gammon) had not told Mr. Aubrey
truly that he both could and would restrain the hand of Mr. Quirk. Could
Mr. Aubrey be otherwise than grateful for such active, effectual, and
manifestly disinterested kindness? Again Gammon made his appearance at
Mrs. Aubrey's tea-table--and was again received with all the sweetness
and frankness of manner which he had formerly experienced from her and
Miss Aubrey. Again he called, on some adroit pretext or another--and
once heard Miss Aubrey's rich voice and exquisite performance on the
piano. He became subject to emotions and impulses of such a sort as he
had never before experienced; yet, whenever he retired from their
fascinating society, he was conscious of an aching void, as it were,
within--he perceived the absence of all sympathy towards him; he felt
_indignant_--but that did not quench the ardor of his aspirations. 'Tis
hardly necessary to say, that on every occasion, Gammon effectually
concealed the profound and agitating feelings which the sight of Miss
Aubrey called forth in him; and what a tax was this upon his powers of
self-control! How he laid himself out to amuse and interest them all!
With what racy humor would he describe the vulgar absurdities of
Titmouse--the stately eccentricities of the Dreddlingtons! With what
eager and breathless interest was he listened to! Few men could make
themselves more completely agreeable than Gammon; and the ladies really
took pleasure in his society; Kate being, all the while, about as far
from any notion of the real state of his feelings, as is my fair reader
of what is at this moment going on in the dog-star. Her reserve towards
him sensibly lessened; why, indeed, should she feel it, towards one of
whom Dr. Tatham spoke so highly, and who appeared to justify his
eulogium? Moreover, Mr. Gammon took special care to speak in the most
unreserved and unqualified manner of the mean and mercenary character of
Mr. Quirk--of the miserable style of business in which he, Mr. Gammon,
was compelled, for only a short time longer, he trusted, to participate,
and which was really revolting to his own feelings. He did his best, in
short, to cause himself to appear a sensitive and high-minded man, whose
unhappy fate it had been to be yoked with those who were the reverse.
Mr. Aubrey regarded him from time to time with silent anxiety and
interest, as one who had it in his power, at any instant he might
choose, to cause the suspended sword to fall upon him; at whose will and
pleasure he continued in the enjoyment of his present domestic
happiness, instead of being incarcerated in prison; but who had hitherto
evinced a disposition of signal forbearance, sincere good-nature, and
disinterestedness. They often used to speak of him, and compare the
impression which his person and conduct had produced in their minds; and
in two points they agreed--that he certainly exhibited anxiety to render
himself agreeable; and that there was a certain _something_ about his
eye which none of them liked. It seemed as though he had in a manner two
natures; and that one of them was watching the effect of the efforts
made by the other to beguile!




CHAPTER XIII.


While, however, the Fates thus seemed to frown upon the aspiring
attempts of Gammon towards Miss Aubrey, they smiled benignantly enough
upon Titmouse, and his suit with the Lady Cecilia. The first shock
over--which no lively sensibilities or strong feelings of her Ladyship
tended to protract, she began to get familiar with the person, manners,
and character of her future lord, and in a measure reconciled to her
fate. "When people understand that they _must_ live together," said a
very great man, "they learn to soften, by mutual accommodation, that
yoke which they know that they cannot shake off; they become good
husbands and wives, from the necessity of remaining husbands and wives,
for necessity is a powerful master in teaching the duties which it
imposes."[33] The serene intelligence of Lady Cecilia having satisfied
her that "IT WAS HER FATE" to be married to Titmouse, she resigned
herself to it tranquilly, calling in to her assistance divers
co-operative reasons for the step which she had agreed to take. She
could thereby accomplish at all events one darling object of her
papa's--the reunion of the long and unhappily-severed family interests.
Then Yatton was certainly a delightful estate to be mistress of--a
charming residence, and one which she might in all probability calculate
on having pretty nearly to herself. The rent-roll was large and
unencumbered, and would admit of a handsome jointure. On her accession
to her own independent rank, the odious name of Titmouse would disappear
in the noble one of Lady Drelincourt, peeress in her own right, and
representative of the oldest barony in the kingdom. Her husband would
then become a mere cipher--no one would ever hear of him, or inquire
after him, or think or care about him--a mere mote in the sunbeam of her
own splendor. But, above all, thank Heaven! there were many ways in
which a _separation_ might be brought about--never mind how soon after
marriage: and a separation was becoming almost a matter of course,
implying nothing derogatory to the character, or lessening to the
personal consequence of the lady--who indeed was almost, as of course,
recognized as an object of sympathy, rather than of suspicion or scorn.
These were powerful forces, all impelling her in one direction--and
irresistibly. How could it be otherwise with one like _her_--a mere
creature of circumstance? Notwithstanding all this, however, there were
occasions when Titmouse was presented to her in a somewhat startling and
sickening aspect. It sometimes almost choked her to see him--ridiculous
object!--in the company of gentlemen--to witness their treatment of him,
and then reflect that he was about to become her--lord and master. One
day, for instance, she accompanied the earl in the carriage to witness
the hounds throw off, not far from Yatton, and where a very brilliant
field was expected. There were, in fact, about two hundred of the
leading gentlemen of the county assembled--and, dear reader, do try to
picture to yourself the figure which Titmouse must have presented among
them--his quizzing-glass screwed into his eye, and clad in his little
pink and leathers!--What a _seat_ was his! How many significant and
scornful smiles, and winks, and shrugs of the shoulders did his
appearance occasion among his bold and high-bred companions! And only
about four or five minutes after they had "gone away"--on the occasion
in question, this unhappy little sinner was thoroughly found out by the
noble animal he rode; and who equally well knew _his own business_, and
what he had _on_! In trying to take a dwarf wall, on the opposite side
of an old green horsepond by the road-side, he urged his horse with that
weak and indecisive impulse which only disgusted him; so he suddenly
drew back at the margin of the pond--and over head and heels flew
Titmouse, descending plump on his head into the deep mud, where he
remained for a moment or two, up to his shoulders, his little legs
kicking about in the air--

"Who's that?" cried one--and another--and another--without stopping, any
more than the Life Guards would have stopped for a sudden individual
casualty in the midst of their tremendous charge at Waterloo--till the
very last of them, who happened to be no less a person than Lord De la
Zouch, seeing, as he came up, the desperate position of the fallen
rider, reined up, dismounted, and with much effort and inconvenience
aided in extricating Titmouse from his fearful yet ludicrous
position--and thus fortunately preserved to society one of its brightest
ornaments. As soon as he was safe---a dismal spectacle to gods and
men--his preserver, not disposed, by discovering who Titmouse was, to
supererogatory courtesy, mounted his horse, leaving Titmouse in the care
of an old woman whose cottage was not far off, and where Titmouse,
having had a good deal of the filth detached from him, remounted his
horse and turned its head homewards--heartily disposed, had he but
_dared_, cruelly to spur, and kick, and flog it; and in this
pickle--stupid, and sullen, and crestfallen--he was overtaken and
recognized by Lord Dreddlington and Lady Cecilia, returning from the
field!

This was her future husband----

Then again--poor Lady Cecilia!--what thought you of the following, which
was one of the letters he addressed to you?--Well might Miss Aubrey
exclaim, "how I should like to see their correspondence!"


                       "The Albanny, Picadilly, London, 12th Oct. 18--.

       "MY DEAR CECILIA,

     "I take Up My pen To Inform you of Arriving safe Here, where Am
     sorry how^r. To say There Is No One which one knows except
     Tradespeople Going About and so Dull on Acc^t. of Customers Out of
     Town, Dearest love You Are the Girl of my Heart As I am of Your's,
     and am particular Lonely Alone Here and wish to be There _where she
     Is_ how I Long to Fold My dearest girl in My Arms hope You Don't
     Forget Me As soon As I am Absent do You often Think of _me_ w^h. I
     do indeed of _you_, and looking Forward to The Happy Days When We
     are United in the Happy bonds of Hymmen, never To part Again
     dearest I Was Driving yesterday In my New Cabb In the park, where
     whom Sh^d. I Meet but That Miss Aubrey W^h. they say (Between you
     And I and The post) is Truly in a Gallopping Consumption on Acc^t.
     Of my Not Having Her A likely thing indeed that I ever car'd for
     Such an individule w^h. Never Did Only of you, Dearest What shall I
     Send you As A Gift Shall it Be In The cloathing Line, For there Is
     a Wonderful Fine and Choice Assortm^t. of Cashmere Shawls and Most
     Remarkable Handsome Cloaks, All Newly arrived fr. Paris, Never
     Think Of The price w^h. Betwixt Lovers Goes For Nothing. However
     _Large the Figure_ Only Say what You Shall have and Down It shall
     Come And Now dearest Girl Adieu.

                 'Those Can't meet Again, who Never Part.'

     dearest Your's to command till death.             T. TITMOUSE.

     "P. T. O.--Love and Duty To My Lord (of Course) who shall Feel only
     Too happy to Call My Father-In-Law, the Sooner The better."

When poor Lady Cecilia received this exquisite epistle, and had read
over only half a dozen lines of it, she flung it on the floor; threw
herself down on the sofa in her dressing-room; and remained silent and
motionless for more than an hour. When she heard Miss Macspleuchan
knock at her door for admittance, Lady Cecilia started up, snatched the
letter from the floor, and thrust it into her dressing-case, before
admitting her "humble companion."

A succession of such letters as the above might have had the effect upon
Lady Cecilia's "_attachment_" to Titmouse, which the repeated affusion
of cold water would have upon the thermometer; but the crack-brained
Fates still favored Mr. Titmouse, by presently investing him with a
character, and placing him in a position, calculated to give him
personal dignity, and thereby redeem and elevate him in the estimation
of his fastidious and lofty mistress--I mean that of candidate for a
seat in Parliament--for the representation of a borough in which he had
a commanding influence:--but this brings me to topics which must not be
lightly handled.

After a national commotion commensurate with the magnitude of the boon
which had been sought for, the great BILL FOR GIVING EVERYBODY
EVERYTHING had passed into a law, and the people were frantic with joy.
Its blooming first fruits were of a sort calculated to satisfy the
public expectation, viz.--two or three earls were turned into marquises,
and one or two marquises into dukes, and deservedly; for these great men
had far higher titles to the gratitude and admiration of the country, in
exacting this second Magna Charta from King ----, than the stern old
barons in extorting the first from King John--namely, they parted with
vast substantial political power, for only a nominal _quid pro quo_, in
the shape of a bit of ribbon or a strawberry leaf. Its next immediate
effect was to cleanse the Augean stable of the House of Commons, by
opening upon it the floodgates of popular will and popular opinion; and
having utterly expelled the herd of ignorant and mercenary wretches
which had so long occupied and defiled it, their places were to be
supplied by a band of patriots and statesmen, as gifted as
disinterested--the people's own enlightened, unbiased, and deliberate
choice. Once put the government of the country--it was said--the
administration of affairs--into hands such as these, and the inevitable
result would be, the immediate regeneration of society, and the securing
the greatest happiness to the greatest number. It was fearfully apparent
that, under the old system, we had sunk into irredeemable contempt
abroad, and were on the very verge of ruin and anarchy at home. So
blessedly true is it, that when things come to the worst, they begin to
mend! In short, the enlightened and enlarged constituencies began
forthwith to look out for fit objects of their choice--for the best men;
men of independent fortune; of deep stake in the welfare of the country;
of spotless private and consistent public character; who, having had
adequate leisure, opportunity, inclination, and capacity, had fitted
themselves to undertake, with advantage to the nation, the grave
responsibilities of statesmen and legislators. Such candidates,
therefore, as Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse, became naturally in universal
request; and the consequence was, such a prodigious flight of Titmice
into the House of Commons--but whither am I wandering? I have to do with
only one little borough--that of Yatton in Yorkshire. The Great Charter
operated upon it, by _first_, in a manner, _amputating_ it of one of its
members; _secondly_, extending its boundary--Grilston, and one or two of
the adjacent places, being incorporated into the new borough; _thirdly_,
by the introduction of the new qualification of voters. I have
ascertained from a very high quarter--in fact, from a Cabinet Minister,
_since deceased_[34]--a curious and important fact; viz. that had Mr.
Titmouse failed in recovering the Yatton property, or been of different
political opinions, in either of these cases, the little borough of
Yatton was doomed to utter extinction: a circumstance which shows the
signal vigilance, the accurate and comprehensive knowledge of local
interest and capabilities, evinced by those great and good men who were
remodelling the representation of the country. How little did my hero
suspect that his political opinions, as newly-installed owner of Yatton,
formed a topic of anxious discussion at more than one Cabinet council,
previous to the passing of the Great Bill! Upon such considerations did
it--in fact--depend whether Yatton should be at once deposited in the
sepulchre of "_Schedule A_;" or added to the dismal rank of surviving,
but _maimed_ ones in "_Schedule B._" As its boundary was extended, so
the constituency of Yatton was, as I have said, enlarged; the invaluable
elective franchise being wisely given to those most in need of the
advantages it could _immediately_ procure; and the fleeting nature of
whose interest naturally enhanced their desire to consult the welfare of
those who had a permanent and deep stake in its prosperity. Though,
however, the change effected by the new act had so considerably added to
the roll of electors, it had not given ground for serious apprehension
as to the security of the seat of the owner of the Yatton property.
After a very long and private interview between Gammon and Titmouse, in
which something transpired which may be referred to hereafter, it was
agreed that--(the New Writs having been issued within one week after the
calmed and sobered new constituencies had been organized--which
organization, again, had been wisely effected within a week or two after
the passing of the act which had created them)--Mr. Titmouse should
instantly scare away all competition, by announcing his determination to
start for the borough. As soon as this was known, a deputation from a
club of the new electors in Grilston waited upon Mr. Titmouse--to
propose the pecuniary terms on which their support was to be obtained.
Hereat he was somewhat startled--but Gammon saw in it the legitimate
working of the new system; and--nothing was ever better managed!--nobody
was in any mischievous secret--neither party compromised; and yet the
happy result was--that _one hundred and nine_ votes were in a trice
secured in Grilston alone for Mr. Titmouse. Then Gammon appointed
Messrs. Bloodsuck and Son the local agents of Titmouse; for whom he
wrote an address to the electors--and, Titmouse promising to have it
printed forthwith, Mr. Gammon returned to town for a day or two. Nothing
could have been more skilful than the document which he had prepared--at
once terse, comprehensive, and showy; meaning everything, or
nothing--(_dolosus semper versatur in generalibus_, was an observation
of Lord Coke's on which Gammon had kept his eye fixed in drawing up his
"Address.") Yet it came to pass, that on the evening of the day of
Gammon's departure, a Mr. Phelim O'Doodle, a splendid billiard-player,
(in fact he had commenced life in the capacity of _marker_ to a
billiard-table near Leicester Square,) and also one of the first members
returned--only a few days before--for an Irish borough in the Liberal
interest, chanced to take Yatton in his way to Scotland, (where he was
going to officiate professionally at a grand match at billiards, at the
house of an early patron, Sir Archibald M'Cannon,) from London; and
being intimate with Mr. Titmouse, from whom (to conceal nothing from the
reader) he had borrowed a little money a few months before, to enable
him to present himself to his intelligent and enthusiastic
constituency--they sat down to canvass the merits of the Address which
the astute but _absent_ Gammon had prepared for Titmouse. Mr. O'Doodle
pronounced it "divilish tame, and _maiger_;" comparing it to toddy, with
the _whiskey omitted_: and availing himself of Gammon's draft as far as
he approved of it, he drew up the following, which put Titmouse into an
ecstasy; and he sent it off the very next morning for insertion in the
_Yorkshire Stingo_. Here is an exact copy of that judicious and able
performance--which I must own I consider quite a model in its way.

       "_To the worthy and independent Electors of Yatton._

     "GENTLEMEN,--His Majesty having been pleased to dissolve the late
     Parliament, under very remarkable and exciting circumstances, and,
     in the midst of the transports of enthusiasm arising out of the
     passing of that second Great Charter of our Liberties, _the Act for
     Giving Everybody Everything_, with kindly wisdom, to call upon you
     to exercise immediately the high and glorious privilege of choosing
     your representative in the New Parliament, I beg leave to announce
     myself as a candidate for that distinguished honor. Gentlemen, long
     before I succeeded in establishing my right to reside among you in
     my present capacity, I felt a deep interest in the welfare of the
     tenants of the property, and especially of those residing in the
     parts adjacent, and who are now so happily introduced into the
     constituency of this ancient and loyal borough. I trust that the
     circumstance of my ancestors having resided for ages within it,
     will not indispose you to a favorable reception of their descendant
     and representative. Gentlemen, my political opinions are those
     which led to the passing of the Great Measure I have alluded to,
     and which are bound up in it. Without going into details, which are
     too multifarious for the limits of such an Address as the present,
     let me assure you, that though firmly resolved to uphold the
     agricultural interests of this great country, I am equally anxious
     to sustain the commercial and manufacturing interests; and whenever
     they are unhappily in fatal conflict with each other, I shall be
     found at my post, zealously supporting _both_, to the utmost of my
     ability. Though a sincere and firm member and friend of the
     Established Church, I am not insensible to the fearful abuses which
     at present prevail in it; particularly in its revenues, which I am
     disposed to lessen and equalize--devoting  the surplus capital to
     useful purposes connected with the State, from which she derived
     them, as history testifies. I am bent upon securing the utmost
     possible latitude to every species of Dissent. In fact, I greatly
     doubt whether any form of religion ought to be '_established_' in a
     free country. While I am resolved to uphold Protestantism, I think
     I best do so, by seeking to remove all restrictions from the
     Catholics, who, I am persuaded, will sacredly abstain from
     endeavoring to promote their own interests at the expense of ours.
     The infallible page of history establishes their humility,
     meekness, and moderation. Gentlemen, depend upon it, the
     established religion is most likely to flourish when surrounded by
     danger, and threatened by persecution; it has an inherent vitality
     which will defy, in the long run, all competition, and there _must_
     be competition, or there can be no triumph. Gentlemen, I am for
     Peace, Retrenchment, and Reform, which are in fact the Three Polar
     Stars of my political conduct. I am an advocate for quarterly
     Parliaments, convinced that we cannot too often be summoned to give
     an account of our stewardship--and that the frequency of elections
     will occasion a wholesome agitation, and stimulus to trade. I am
     for extending the elective franchise to all, except those who are
     actually the inmates of a prison or a poor-house on the day of
     election; and for affording to electors the inviolable secrecy and
     protection of the Ballot. I am an uncompromising advocate of civil
     and religious liberty all over the globe; and, in short, of giving
     the greatest happiness to the greatest number. Gentlemen, before
     concluding, I wish to state explicitly, as the result of long and
     deep inquiry and reflection, that I am of opinion that every
     constituency is entitled, nay, bound, to exact from a candidate for
     its suffrages the most strict and minute pledges as to his future
     conduct in Parliament, in every matter, great or small, that can
     come before it; in order to prevent his judgment being influenced
     and warped by the dangerous sophistries and fallacies which are
     broached in Parliament, and protect his integrity from the base,
     sinister, and corrupt influences which are invariably brought to
     bear on public men. I am ready, therefore, to pledge myself to
     anything that may be required of me by any elector who may honor me
     with his  support. Gentlemen, such are my political principles,
     and I humbly hope that they will prove to be those of the electors
     of this ancient and loyal borough, so as to warrant the legislature
     in having preserved it in existence, amid the wholesale havoc which
     it has just made in property of this description. Though it is not
     probable that we shall be harassed by a contest, I shall make a
     point of waiting upon you all personally, and humbly answering all
     questions that may be put to me: and should I be returned, rely
     upon it, that I will never give you occasion to regret your display
     of so signal an evidence of your confidence in me.--I have the
     honor to be, Gentlemen, your most obedient and humble servant,

                                                           "T. TITMOUSE.

       "Yatton, 3d December, 18--."

"Upon my soul, if that don't carry the election hollow," said Mr.
O'Doodle, laying down his pen, and mixing himself a fresh tumbler of
half-and-half brandy and water, "you may call me bog-trotter to the end
of my days, and be ---- to me!"!!!

"Why--a--ya--as! 'pon my life it's quite a superior article, and no
mistake"--quoth Titmouse; "but--eh? d'ye think they'll ever believe I
writ it all? Egad, my fine fellow, to compose a piece of composition
like that, by Jove!--requires--and besides, suppose those dem fellows
begin asking me all sorts of questions and thingembobs, eh? You
_couldn't_ stay and go about with one a bit? Eh, Phelim?"

"Fait, Titty, an' it's mighty little awake to the way of _doing
business_, that ye are! ah, ha! Murder and thieves! what does it signify
what you choose to say or write to them? they're only _pisintry_:
and--the real point to be looked at is this--all those that you can
_command_--d'ye see--of course you will, or send 'em to the right about;
and those that you can't--that's the _new_ blackguards round
about--_buy_, if it's necessary, fait!"

"Oh, that's _done_!--It _is_, 'pon my soul!" whispered Titmouse.

"Oh? Is it in earnest you are? Then you're M. P. for the borough; and on
the strength of it, I'll replenish!" and so he did, Titmouse following
his example; and in a pretty state were they, some hour or two
afterwards, conducted to their apartments.

It is difficult to describe the rage of Gammon on seeing the Address
which had been substituted for that which he had prepared, with so much
caution and tact: but the thing was done, and he was obliged to submit.
The Address duly appeared in the _Yorkshire Stingo_. It was also
placarded liberally all over the borough, and distributed about,
exciting a good deal of interest, and also much approbation among the
new electors. It was thought, however, that it was a piece of
supererogation, inasmuch as there could be no possible doubt that Mr.
Titmouse would _walk over the course_.

In this, however, it presently proved that the _quidnuncs_ of Yatton
were terribly mistaken. A copy of the _Yorkshire Stingo_, containing the
foregoing "Address," was sent, on the day of its publication, by Dr.
Tatham to Mr. Aubrey, who had read it aloud, with feelings of mingled
sorrow and contempt, on the evening of its arrival, in the presence of
Mrs. Aubrey, Miss Aubrey, and also of one who was by no means an
unfrequent visitor, Mr. Delamere. The Aubreys were sad enough; and he
endeavored to dissipate the gloom which hung over them, by ridiculing,
very bitterly and humorously, the pretensions of the would-be member for
Yatton--the presumed writer (who, however, Kate protested, without
giving her reasons, could never have been Mr. Titmouse) of the precious
"Address." He partially succeeded. Both Aubrey and he laughed heartily
as they went more deliberately over it; but Kate and Mrs. Aubrey spoke
very gravely and indignantly about that part of it which related to the
Established Church and the Protestant Religion.

"Oh dear, dear!" quoth Kate at length, with a sudden burst of
impetuosity, after a considerable and rather melancholy pause in the
conversation; "only to think that such an odious little wretch is to
represent the dear old----What would I not give to see him defeated!"

"Pho, Kate," replied her brother, rather sadly, "who is there to oppose
him? Pickering told me, you know, that he should not go into the House
again; and even if he felt disposed to contest Yatton, what chance could
he have against Mr. Titmouse's influence?"

"Oh, I'm sure all the old tenants hate the little monkey, to a man--and
that _you_ know, Charles, right well!"

"That may be, Kate, but they must vote for him, or be turned out of"----

"Oh, I've no _patience_, Charles, to hear of such things!" interrupted
his sister, with not a little petulance in her manner.

"Do you mean to say, that you should like to see a rival start to
contest your dear old borough with Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Mr. Delamere,
who had been listening to the foregoing brief colloquy in silence, his
eyes fixed with eager delight on the animated and beautiful countenance
of Miss Aubrey.

"_Indeed_ I should, Mr. Delamere," cried Kate, eagerly--"I would give
five guineas, if I had it"--adding, however, with a sudden sigh, looking
at her brother; "but--heigh-ho!--as Charles says, how absurd it is to
fret one's self about it--about a thing we can't help--and--a place one
has no longer--alas!--any concern with!" As she said this, her voice
fell a little, and her eyes filled with tears. But her little sally had
been attended with consequences she never could have dreamed of.

Mr. Delamere took leave of them shortly afterwards, without
communicating a word of any intentions he might have conceived upon the
subject to any of them. But the first place he went to, in the morning,
was a great banker's, who had been appointed the principal acting
executor of the Marquis of Fallowfield, a very recently deceased uncle
of Delamere's, to whom his Lordship had left a legacy of £3,000; and
'twas to get at this same legacy that was the object of Delamere's visit
to Sir Omnium Bullion's. For some time the worthy baronet--who had not
then even proved the will--would not listen to the entreaties of the
eager young legatee: but the moment that he heard of the purpose for
which it was wanted, Sir Omnium being a very fierce Tory, and who had
_lost_ his own snug borough by the Bill for _Giving Everybody
Everything_, instantly relented. "There, my fine fellow, that's a piece
of pluck I vastly admire! Sign _that_," said Sir Omnium, tossing to him
an "I. O. U. £3,000," and drawing him a check for the amount: wishing
him, with all imaginable zeal and energy, good speed. Delamere's
excitement would not allow him to wait till the evening, for the mail;
so, within a couple of hours' time of effecting this delightful
arrangement with Sir Omnium, he was seated in a post-chaise and four,
rattling at top-speed on his way to Yorkshire.

Sufficiently astonished were Lord and Lady De la Zouch, when he
presented himself to them at Fotheringham; but infinitely more so, when
he named the object of his coming down, and with desperate entreaties
besought his father's sanction for the enterprise. 'Twas very hard for
Lord De la Zouch to deny anything to one on whom he doted as he did upon
this, his only child. His Lordship, moreover, was one of the keenest
politicians living; and as for elections, he was an old campaigner, and
had stood several desperate contests, and spent immense sums upon them.
And here was his son, to use a well-known phrase, indeed a _chip of the
old block_!--Lord De la Zouch, in short, really felt a secret pleasure
in contemplating the resemblance to his early self--and after a little
demur he began to give way. He shook his head, however, discouragingly;
spoke of Delamere's youth--barely two-and-twenty; the certainty of
defeat, and the annoyance of being beaten by such a creature as
Titmouse; the suddenness and lateness of the move--and so forth.

More and more impetuous, however, became his son.

"I'll tell you what, sir," said Lord De la Zouch, scarce able to speak
with the gravity he wished, "it strikes me that this extraordinary,
expensive, absurd, and hopeless scheme of yours, is all the result
of--eh? I see--I understand! It's done to please--Come, now, be frank,
sir! how long, before you left town, had you seen Miss"----

"I pledge my word, sir," replied Delamere, emphatically, "that neither
Miss Aubrey, nor Mr. nor Mrs. Aubrey--whom, however, I certainly saw the
very night before I quitted town, and even conversed with on the subject
of Mr. Titmouse's Address--has interchanged one syllable with me on the
subject of my starting for the borough; and I believe them to be at this
moment as ignorant of what I am about as you, sir, were, the moment
before you saw me here."

"It is enough," said his father, seriously, who knew that his son,
equally with himself, had a rigorous regard for truth on all occasions,
great and small--"and had it even been otherwise, I--I--eh? I don't
think there's anything _very_ monstrous in it!" He paused, and smiled
kindly at his son--and added, "Well--I--I--we certainly shall be laughed
at for our pains; it's really a madcap sort of business, Geoffrey;
but"--Lord De la Zouch had given way--"I own that I should not like to
have been thwarted by _my_ father on an occasion like the present; so,
let it be done, as you've set your heart upon it. And," he added with a
smile, "pray, Mr. Delamere, have you considered what I shall have to pay
for your sport?"

"Not one penny, sir!" replied his son, with a certain swell of manner.

"Ay, ay!" exclaimed his Lordship, briskly--"How's that, sir?"

Then Delamere told him of what he had done; at which Lord De la Zouch
first looked serious, and then burst into laughter at the eagerness of
old Sir Omnium to aid the affair. Lord De la Zouch well knew that the
old baronet was infinitely exasperated against those who had robbed him
of his borough! Never was "_Schedule A_" mentioned in his presence
without a kind of spasm passing over his features! as though it were the
burial-ground where lay one long and fondly loved! "No, no," said his
Lordship, "that must not stand; I won't have _any_ risk of Sir Omnium's
getting into a scrape, and shall write off to request him to annul the
transaction--with many thanks for what he has done--and I'll try whether
I have credit enough with my bankers--eh, Geoffrey?"

"You are very kind to me, sir, but really I would rather"----

"Pho, pho--let it be as I say; and now, go and dress for dinner, and,
after that, the sooner you get about _your_ 'Address,' the better. Let
me see a draft of it as soon as it is finished. Let Mr. Parkinson be
sent for immediately from Grilston, to see how the land lies; and, in
short, if we _do_ go into the thing, let us dash into it with
spirit--I'll write off and have down from town--a-hem!" his Lordship
suddenly paused--and then added--"And hark 'ee, sir--as to that
Address of yours, I'll have no despicable trimming, and trying to catch
votes by vague and flattering"----

"Trust me, sir!" said Delamere, with a proud smile, "mine shall be, at
all events, a contrast to that of my '_honorable opponent_.'"

"Go straight a-head, sir," continued Lord De la Zouch, with a lofty and
determined air; "nail your colors to the mast. Speak out in a plain,
manly way, so that no one can misunderstand you. I'd rather a thousand
times over see you beaten out of the field--lose the election like a
gentleman--than win it by any sort of _trickery_, especially as far as
the profession of your political sentiments and opinions is concerned.
Bear yourself so, Geoffrey, in this your maiden struggle, that when it
is over, you may be able to lay your hand on your heart, and say, 'I
have _won_ honorably'--or 'I have _lost_ honorably.' So long as you can
feel and say _this_, laugh at election bills--at the long faces of your
friends--the exulting faces of your enemies.--Will you bear all this in
mind, Geoffrey?"

"I will, I will, sir," replied his eager son; and added, with an excited
air, "won't it come on them like"----

"Do you hear that bell, sir?" said Lord De la Zouch, laughing, and
moving away. Delamere bowed, and with a brisk step, a flushed cheek, and
an elated air, betook himself to his dressing-room, to prepare for
dinner.

Shortly afterwards, Mr. Parkinson made his appearance, and to his
infinite amazement was invested instantly with the character of agent
for Mr. Delamere, as candidate for the borough! After he and the earl
had heard the following Address read by Delamere, they very heartily
approved of it. Mr. Parkinson took it home with him; it was in the
printer's hands that very night, and by seven o'clock in the morning,
was being stuck up plentifully on all the walls in Grilston, and in
fact, all over the borough:--

       "_To the Independent Electors of the Borough of Yatton._

     "GENTLEMEN--I hope you will not consider me presumptuous, in
     venturing to offer myself to your notice as a candidate for the
     honor of representing you in Parliament. In point of years, I am, I
     have reason to believe, even younger than the gentleman whom I have
     come forward to oppose. But, indeed, for the fact of his being
     personally a comparative stranger to you, I should have paused long
     before contesting with him the representation of a borough on which
     he has unquestionably certain legitimate claims. The moment,
     however, that I had read his Address, I resolved to come forward
     and oppose him. Gentlemen, the chief ground on which I am induced
     to take this step, is, that I disapprove of the tone and spirit of
     that Address, and hold opinions entirely opposed to all those which
     it expresses, and which I have no hesitation in saying I consider
     to be unworthy of any one seeking so grave a trust as that of
     representing you in Parliament. As for my own opinions, they are in
     all essential respects identical with those of the gentlemen who
     have, during a long series of years, represented you, and
     especially with those of my highly honored and gifted friend, Mr.
     Aubrey. Gentlemen, my own family is not unknown to you, nor are the
     opinions and principles which for centuries they have consistently
     supported, and which are also mine.

     "I am an affectionate and uncompromising friend of our glorious and
     venerable Established Church, and of its union with the State;
     which it is my inflexible determination to support by every means
     in my power, as the most effectual mode of securing civil and
     religious liberty. I am disposed to resist any further concessions
     either to Roman Catholics or Dissenters, because I think that they
     cannot be made safely or advantageously. Gentlemen, there _is_ a
     point at which toleration becomes anarchy; and I am desirous to
     keep as far from that point as possible.

     "I earnestly deprecate putting our Agricultural or Commercial and
     Manufacturing interests into _competition_ with each
     other, as needless and mischievous. Both are essential elements in
     the national welfare; both should be upheld to the utmost: but if
     circumstances _should_ unhappily bring them into inevitable
     conflict, I avow myself heart and soul a friend to the Agricultural
     interest.

     "Gentlemen, I know not whether it would be more derogatory to your
     character, or to mine, to exact or give _pledges_ as to my conduct
     on any particular measure, great or small, which may come before
     Parliament. It appears to me both absurd and ignominious, and
     inconsistent with every true principle of representation. One,
     however, I willingly give you--that I will endeavor to do my duty,
     by consulting your interests as a part of the general interests of
     the nation. I trust that I shall never be found uncourteous or
     inaccessible; and I am confident that none of you will entertain
     unreasonable expectations concerning my power to serve you
     individually or collectively.

     "Gentlemen, having entered into this contest, I pledge myself to
     fight it out to the last; and, if I fail, to retire with good
     humor. My friends and I will keep a vigilant eye on any attempts
     which may be made to resort to undue influence or coercion; which,
     however, I cannot suppose will be the case.

     "Gentlemen, this is the best account I can give you, within the
     limits of such an Address as the present, of my political opinions,
     and of the motives which have induced me to come forward; and I
     shall, within a day or two, proceed to call upon you personally. In
     the mean while I remain, Gentlemen, your faithful servant,

                                             "GEOFFREY LOVEL DELAMERE.

       "_Fotheringham Castle, 7th Dec. 18--._"

Two or three days afterwards there arrived at Mr. Aubrey's, in Vivian
Street, two large packets, franked "DE LA ZOUCH," and addressed to Mr.
Aubrey, containing four copies of the foregoing "Address," accompanied
by the following hurried note:--

                                      "_Fotheringham, 8th Dec. 18--._

     "MY DEAR AUBREY--What think you of this sudden and somewhat
     Quixotic enterprise of my son? I fear it is quite  hopeless--but
     there was no resisting his importunities. I must say he is going
     into the affair (which has already made a prodigious stir down
     here) in a very fine spirit. His _Address_ is good, is it not? The
     only thing I regret is, his entering the lists with such a creature
     as that fellow Titmouse--and, moreover, being _beaten_ by
     him.--Yours ever faithfully and affectionately,

                                                        "DE LA ZOUCH.

     "P. S.--You should only see little Dr. Tatham since he has heard of
     it. He spins about the village like a humming-top! I hope that, as
     far as his worldly interests are concerned, he is not acting
     imprudently: but _I_ will take care of that, for I love and
     reverence the little doctor. Our dear love to the ladies. (In great
     haste.)"

This letter was read with almost suspended breath, by Mr. Aubrey, and
then by Mrs. and Miss Aubrey. With still greater emotion were the
printed enclosures opened and read. Each was held in a trembling hand,
its reader's color going and coming. Miss Aubrey's heart beat faster and
faster; she turned very pale--but with a strong effort recovered
herself. Then taking the candle, she withdrew with a hasty and excited
air, taking her copy of the Address with her to her own room; and there
burst into tears, and wept for some time. She felt her heart dissolving
in tenderness towards Delamere! It was some time before she could summon
resolution enough to return. When she did, Mrs. Aubrey made a faint
effort to rally her; but each, on observing the traces of the other's
recent and strong emotion, was silent, and with difficulty preserved any
semblance of a calm demeanor.

Equally strong emotions, but of a very different description, were
excited in the bosoms of certain persons at Yatton Hall, by the
appearance of Mr. Delamere's Address. 'Twas Mr. Barnabas Bloodsuck,
(junior,)--a middle-sized, square-set young man, of about thirty, with a
broad face, a very flat nose, light frizzly hair, and deep-set gray
eyes--a bustling, confident, hard-mouthed fellow--who, happening to be
stirring in the main street of Grilston early in the morning of the 8th
December 18--, beheld a man in the act of sticking up Mr. Delamere's
Address against a wall. Having prevailed on the man to part with one,
Mr. Bloodsuck was within a quarter of an hour on horseback, galloping
down to Yatton--almost imagining himself to be carrying with him a sort
of hand-grenade, which might explode in his pocket as he went on. He was
ushered into the breakfast-room, where sat Mr. Gammon and Mr. Titmouse,
just finishing their morning meal.

"My stars--good-morning! gents,--but here's a kettle of fish!" quoth Mr.
Bloodsuck, with an excited air, wiping the perspiration from his
forehead; and then plucking out of his pocket the damp and crumpled
Address of Mr. Delamere, he handed it to Mr. Gammon, who changed color
on seeing it, and read it over in silence.

Mr. Titmouse looked at him with a disturbed air; and having finished his
mixture of tea and brandy, "Eh--e--eh, Gammon!--I say"--he
stammered--"what's in the wind? 'Pon my soul, you look--eh?"

"Nothing but a piece of good fortune, for which you are indebted to your
distinguished friend, Mr. Phelim O'Something," replied Gammon, bitterly,
"whose precious Address has called forth for you an opponent whom you
would not otherwise have had."

"Hang Mr. O'Doodle!" exclaimed Titmouse; "I--'pon my precious soul--I
always thought him a-a fool and a knave. I'll make him pay me the money
he owes me!" and he strode up and down the room, with his hands thrust
furiously into his pockets.

"You had perhaps better direct your powerful mind to this Address,"
quoth Mr. Gammon, with a blighting smile, "as it slightly concerns
you;" and handing it to Titmouse, the latter sat down to try and obey
him.

"That cock won't _really_ fight, though, eh?" inquired Mr. Bloodsuck, as
he resumed his seat after helping himself to an enormous slice of cold
beef at the side table.

"I think it _will_," replied Mr. Gammon, thoughtfully: and presently
continued after a pause, with a visible effort to speak calmly, "it is
useless to say anything about the haughty intolerant Toryism it
displays; that is all fair; but _is_ it not hard, Mr. Bloodsuck, that
when I had written an Address which would have effectually"----

"Mr. Phelim O'Doodle owes me three hundred pounds, Gammon, and I hope
you'll get it for me at once; 'pon my soul, he's a most cursed scamp,"
quoth Titmouse, furiously, looking up with an air of desperate chagrin,
on hearing Gammon's last words. That gentleman, however, took no notice
of him, and proceeded, addressing Mr. Bloodsuck, "I have weighed every
word in that Address. _It means mischief._ It has evidently been well
considered; it is calm and determined--and we shall have a desperate
contest, or I am grievously mistaken."

"E--e--eh? E--h? What, Gammon?" inquired Titmouse, who, though his eye
appeared, in obedience to Gammon, to have been travelling over the
all-important document which he held in his hand, had been listening
with trembling anxiety to what was said by his companions.

"I say that we are to have a contested election: that you won't walk
over the course, as you might have done. Here's a most formidable
opponent started against you!"

"What? 'Pon my soul--for _my_ borough? For Yatton?"

"Yes, and one who will fight you tooth and nail."

"'Pon--my--precious soul! What a cursed scamp! What a most infernal
black----Who is it?"

"No _blackguard_, sir," interrupted Gammon, very sternly; "but--a
gentleman, perhaps, even, every way equal to yourself," he added with a
cruel smile, "the Honorable Mr. Delamere, the son and heir of Lord De la
Zouch."

"By jingo! you don't say so! Why, he's a hundred thousand a-year,"
interrupted Titmouse, turning very pale.

"Oh, _that_ he has, at least," interposed Mr. Bloodsuck, who had nearly
finished a rapid and most disgusting breakfast; "and two such bitter
Tories you never saw or heard of before--for, like father, like son."

"Egad! is it?" inquired Titmouse, completely crestfallen. "Well! and
what if--eh, Gammon? Isn't it?"

"It is a very serious business, sir, indeed," quoth Gammon, gravely.

"By Jove--isn't it a cursed piece of--impudence! What? Come into _my
borough_? He might as well come into my house! Isn't one as much mine,
as the other? It's as bad as housebreaking--but we're beforehand with
him, anyhow, with those prime chaps at Gr----" Mr. Bloodsuck's teeth
chattered; he glanced towards the door; and Gammon gave Titmouse a look
which almost paralyzed, and at all events silenced him.

"They'll bleed freely?" said Bloodsuck, by-and-by, with a desperate
effort to look concerned--whereas he was in a secret ecstasy at the
profitable work in prospect for their house.

"Lord De la Zouch would not have entered into this thing if he had not
some end in view which he considers attainable--and as for money"----

"Oh, as for that," said Bloodsuck, with a matter-of-fact air, "ten
thousand pounds to him is a mere drop in the bucket."

"O Lord! O Lord! and must _I_ spend money too?" inquired Titmouse, with
a look of ludicrous alarm.

"We must talk this matter over alone, Mr. Bloodsuck," said Gammon,
anxiously--"shall we go to Grilston, or will you fetch your father
hither?"'

"'Pon my soul, Gammon," quoth Titmouse, desperately, and snapping his
finger and thumb, "those cursed Aubreys, you may depend on 't, are at
the bottom of all this"----

"_That_ there's not the least doubt of," quoth Bloodsuck, as he buttoned
up his coat with a matter-of-fact air; but the words of Titmouse caused
Mr. Gammon suddenly to dart first at one, and then at the other of the
speakers, a keen penetrating glance; and presently his expressive
countenance showed that _surprise_ had been succeeded by deep chagrin,
which soon settled into gloomy thoughtfulness.




NOTES.


[Footnote 1: NOTE 1. Page 1.

See _post_, Chapter V., Preliminary Note.]


[Footnote 2: NOTE 2. Page 5.

An important and salutary improvement in the law of libel, especially in
the case of newspapers, was effected in 1843, by statute 6 and 7 Vict.
c. 96. Till then the TRUTH was inadmissible as a _justification_ on a
criminal prosecution for libel--the rule being that the greater the
truth the greater was the libel--by which was meant its greater tendency
to a breach of the peace. Now, however, the defendant may _defend_
himself against an indictment or information, by pleading that the
charge was true, and that it was for the public benefit that it should
have been published; but he must specially state in his plea the
particular facts by reason of which it was for the public benefit. If
such plea, or evidence in support of it, should be false or malicious,
the act allows that circumstance to be taken into consideration in
awarding punishment. A serious amount of fine, imprisonment, and hard
labor, may be inflicted for publishing, or threatening (with intent to
extort money) to publish, a false and malicious libel. In _civil_
proceedings a defendant may plead that he was not guilty of _actual_
malice or _gross_ negligence; and offered to publish, or published, a
full apology, in which case he may pay money into court by way of
amends; and in all actions of defamation he may show an apology, or
offer of one, in mitigation of damages. This statute does not extend to
Scotland.]


[Footnote 3: NOTE 3. Page 32.

Troilus and Cressida, i. 3.]


[Footnote 4: NOTE 4. Page 40.

The great increase of business alone, is the cause of the accumulation
of arrears--especially in the Queen's Bench, which is almost overpowered
by the enormous pressure of its criminal business. All the three
superior courts have recently adopted post-terminal fittings, to enable
them to despatch their arrears; an act of Parliament having been passed
(stat. 1 and 2 Vict. c. 32) for that purpose.]


[Footnote 5: NOTE 5. Page 42.

If the reader will refer to vol. i. p. 490, he may see how the
_disabilities_ here alluded to arose, and affected the case. The
doctrine of "adverse possession" is founded on the anxiety of our law to
secure quietude of title. It gives every reasonable facility for the
assertion of just rights against wrongful possessors of property; but
with equal reasonableness fixes a limit to immunity from the
consequences of negligent acquiescence under usurpation, considering it,
in a word, better policy to protect a person in possession, than to
encourage a struggle for it among strangers. _Vigilantibus non
dormientibus jura subveniunt_, is the maxim of the common law, on which
also the statute law has often acted, and recently with great effect, by
stat. 3 and 4 Will. 4, c. 27, (passed on the 24th July 1833.) By its
provisions, many of the most subtle and difficult questions concerning
the nature of "possession" are got rid of; and the period of twenty
years from the commencement of the rights of possession, fixed as that
within which alone an action or suit in equity for the recovery of lands
must be brought--unless a party was, when his right accrued, laboring
under the _disability_ of infancy, coverture, insanity, or absence
beyond seas: in any of which cases an extension of _ten_ years is
allowed: but it is expressly provided, that however numerous such
disabilities may have been--however long and uninterruptedly they may
have lasted--_forty_ years shall be absolutely the limit within which
the action or suit must be brought from the time of the _right first
accruing_. If the statute "once begin to run," as the lawyers say,
"nothing can stop it." The above constitute some of the boldest and best
of the great alterations recently effected in our English system of real
property law. A far longer period than the present one was requisite to
constitute "adverse possession" at the time mentioned in the text.]


[Footnote 6: NOTE 6. Page 43.

See _post_, Chapter V., Preliminary Note.]


[Footnote 7: NOTE 7. Page 49.

"[Greek: 'Anthropinos]," signifies in this place, (1 Corinth. x. 13,)
says a commentator on this memorable passage of Scripture, "such as is
suited to the nature and circumstances of man; such as every man may
reasonably expect, if he consider the nature of his body and soul, and
his situation in the present world."]


[Footnote 8: NOTE 8. Page 54.

It might be inferred, from a somewhat loose statement in an English law
treatise, that in a case like that of Mr. Aubrey--viz. of possession of
property in entire ignorance that it belonged to another--a Court of
Equity would protect against the rightful owner's claim for the mesne
profits. Such, however, is by no means the case. Mr. Titmouse had
recovered at law--by the superior strength of his title, and without
requiring any assistance whatever from a Court of Equity; the mesne
profits, therefore, were absolutely his--and any interference, by a
Court of Equity, to deprive him of them, would have been an act of
direct spoliation. Such a notion, therefore, is utterly destitute of
foundation. If Mr. Titmouse had been compelled to seek the assistance of
a Court of Equity in order to prosecute his claim, and had clearly been
guilty of negligence or fraud; it is possible that some terms might have
been imposed upon him, with reference to the mesne profits to be wrung
from his comparatively-speaking innocent opponent--but even then, it is
conceived that Equity would be very slow and jealous in exercising such
a stretch of power. The Roman law took a different view of the subject,
regarding him--_qui justas causas habuisset quare bona ad se pertinere
existimasset_, (Dig. Lib. v. Tit. iii. 1, 20, &c.)--with great leniency,
and exempting him from payment of mesne profits accrued previous to the
action. According to the law of Scotland, a _bonâ fide_ possessor
evicted (i. e. turned out) by a person having a better right, is
entitled to retain the fruits or profits (called "_violent profits_")
which he may have reaped or received during his _bonâ fide_ possession.
It would seem, however, that this doctrine is based not solely upon the
_bonâ fide_ ignorance of the ousted party, but upon the concurring
_negligence_ and _delay_ of his victorious opponent.]


[Footnote 9: NOTE 9. Page 58.

It is by no means a matter of course, to apply for and obtain this
nominal appointment, which occasions _ipso facto_ the vacating a seat in
Parliament. It is a matter of discretion with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer; and he has _refused_ it during the present session [1844] to
several applicants.]


[Footnote 10: NOTE 10. Page 75.

This species of sport has recently, alas! been seriously interfered
with, by the increased power given, in such cases, to the police
magistrates.]


[Footnote 11: NOTE 11. Page 91.

See Dr. Bubble's "Account of the late Landslips, and of the Remains of
Subterranean Castles."--Quarto Edition, Vol. III. pp. 2000-2008.]


[Footnote 12: NOTE 12. Page 91.

_Ante_, Vol. 1., p. 441.]


[Footnote 13: NOTE 13. Page 93.

Horace, Carm. 1. 34, _ad finem._]


[Footnote 14: NOTE 14. Page 96.

Troilus and Cressida, i. 3.]


[Footnote 15: NOTE 15. Page 224.

1 Samuel, ch. ii., v. 36.]


[Footnote 16: NOTE 16. Page 234.

It may be as well to apprise the reader, that this strange mode of
pleading has been lately superseded by one more reasonable and
intelligible.]


[Footnote 17: NOTE 17. Page 281.

"_Mayhem_," saith Blackstone, "is a battery attended with this
aggravating circumstance: that thereby the party injured is forever
disabled from making so good a defence against future external injuries,
as before he might have done. Among these defensive members are reckoned
not only arms and legs, but a finger, an eye, and a _fore-tooth_; but
the loss of one of the _jaw_-teeth, is no _mayhem_ at common law, for
they can be of no use in fighting."--3 _Black. Comm._ p. 121.]


[Footnote 18: NOTE 18. Page 282.

In the year 1838, arrest on mesne process was abolished by statute 1 and
2 Vict. c. 110, (which recited that "the power of arrest upon mesne
process was unnecessarily extensive and severe, and ought to be
relaxed,") except in cases where a debtor may be arrested by order of a
judge, to prevent his quitting the kingdom. In the year 1844, the
legislature went so far (stat. 7 and 8 Vict. c. 96, § 58) as to abolish
arrest on _final_ process, in all cases of debts not exceeding £20,
independently of costs. The policy of this measure is gravely
questionable.]


[Footnote 19: NOTE 19. Page 283.

A _detainer_ signifies a writ, by means of which a prisoner, once
arrested, may be detained at the suit of any _other_ creditor.]


[Footnote 20: NOTE 20. Page 285.

The last acts of the kind are those for abolishing Arrest on Mesne
Process (see _ante_, p. 282, note) and amending the Insolvent Laws,
(stat. 1 and 2 Vict. c. 110, § 78, and 7 and 8 Vict. c. 96, § 59.)]


[Footnote 21: NOTE 21. Page 312.

For a really _short_-sighted person a concave glass, and for a too
_long_-sighted man a convex glass, is requisite: but simpletons who wear
a glass for mere appearance' sake, have one through which they can
really see--_i. e._ a piece of common window-glass. Three-fourths of the
young men about town wear the last kind of glass.]


[Footnote 22: NOTE 22. Page 316.

Since this was written, Great Britain has, by the demonstration of her
irresistible naval and military power, and by the wisdom of her
diplomacy, totally changed our relations with China--which has opened to
us five of her ports, ceded to us a great island, and entered into a
commercial treaty with us!]


[Footnote 23: NOTE 23. Page 339.

Hor. Carm. V., iv.]


[Footnote 24: NOTE 24. Page 352.

Plowden's _Commentaries_, 308, a, (Sharrington _v._ Strotton.)]


[Footnote 25: NOTE 25. Page 362.

About the time when this was originally written, there was a person who,
chiefly at Windsor, occasioned much surprise and curiosity by the power
which he appeared to exercise over horses, by touching, as he alleged, a
particular nerve within the mouth.]


[Footnote 26: NOTE 26. Page 372.

Per bend Ermine and Pean, two lions rampant combatant, counter-changed,
armed and langued Gules; surmounted by three bendlets undee Argent, on
each three fleurs-de-lis Azure; on a chief Or, three TITMICE volant
proper; all within a bordure gobonated Argent and Sable.

CREST.--On a cap of maintenance a Titmouse proper, ducally gorged Or,
holding in his beak a woodlouse embowed Azure. Motto--"_Je le tiens._"

_Note._--The Author was favored, on the first appearance of this portion
of the work, with several complimentary communications on the subject of
Sir Gorgeous Tintack's feats in heraldry: and one gentleman eminent in
that science, and to whom the author is indebted for the annexed
spirited drawing, has requested the author to annex to the separate
edition, as he now does, the two following very curious extracts from
old heraldic writers:--the first, supporting the author's ridicule of
the prevalent folly of devising complicated coats of arms; and the
second being a very remarkable specimen of the extent to which an
enthusiast in the science was carried on its behalf.

_First_--"An other thing that is amisse, as I take it, and hath great
neede to be reformed, is the quartering of many markes in one shield,
coate, or banner; for sithence it is true that such markes serue to no
other vse, but for a commander to lead by, or to be known by, it is of
necessitie that the same should be _apparent_, _faire_, and _easie to be
understoode_: so that the quartering of many of them together, doth
hinder the vse for which they are provided.--As how is it possible for
a plaine unlearned man to discover and know a sunder, six or
eight--sometimes thirty or forty several marks clustered altogether in
one shield or banner, nay, though he had as good skill as _Robert
Glower_, late Somerset that dead is, and the eies of an egle, amongst
such a confusion of things, yet should he never be able to decipher the
errors that are dalie committed in this one point, nor discover or know
one banner or standard from an other, be the same neuer so
large?"--_Treatise on the True Use of Armes--by Mr. Sampson Erdswicke_,
[a famous antiquary in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.]

[_Secondly._--An extract from the _Book of St. Alban's_, written late in
the fifteenth century, by _Dame Juliana Berners, Abbess of St.
Alban's_]--

"_Cain_ and all his offspring became _churls_ both by the curse of God,
and his own father. _Seth_ was made a _gentleman_, through his father
and mother's blessing, from whose loins issued _Noah_, a _gentleman_ by
kind and lineage. Of Noah's sons, _Chem_ became a churl by his father's
curse, on account of his gross barbarism towards his father. _Japhet_
and _Shem_, Noah made gentlemen. From the offspring of gentlemanly
Japhet came _Abraham_, _Moyses_, and the Prophets, and also the King of
the right line of Mary, of whom that only absolute gentleman[X] Jesus
was borne; perfite God and perfite man according to his manhood, King of
the land of Juda, and the Jewes, and _gentleman_ by his Mother Mary,
princess of coate Armour."

  [X] One of our oldest dramatists speaks of our Saviour in an earnest
  sense as "the _first true gentleman_ that ever lived."]


[Footnote 27: NOTE 27. Page 374.

I vehemently suspect myself guilty of a slight anachronism here; this
ancient and illustrious monarchy having been mediatized by the congress
of Vienna in 1815--its territories now forming part of the parish of
Hahnroost, in the kingdom of ----.]


[Footnote 28: NOTE 28. Page 399.

_Ante_, p. 265.]


[Footnote 29: NOTE 29. Page 415.

[Greek: Mêdeia], 1036-9. _Anglicé_: Alas, alas, my children! why do you
fondly fix your eyes upon me? Why beams upon me _that last smile_ of
yours? Oh, woe! woe! is me! What shall I do? For now that I have seen
the bright eyes of my little ones, my heart is broken!]


[Footnote 30: NOTE 30. Page 415.

Ezek. xii. 18.]


[Footnote 31: NOTE 31. Page 453.

Since this work was published, a very important statute (6 and 7 Vict.
c. 85) was passed, in the year 1843, for removing the incompetency to
give evidence, by reason of any crime, or _interest_.]


[Footnote 32: NOTE 32. Page 456.

When once a man's necessities have compelled him to subscribe his name
to the three magical letters "I. O. U.," he is liable for the sum
specified in it to any one simply producing it, though it be addressed
to no one, and no proof be given that "U" means the plaintiff, (see
_Curtis_ v. _Rickards_, Manning and Grainger, 46; and _Douglas_ v.
_Hone_, 12 Adolphus and Ellis, 641,) unless the defendant be able to
adduce clear evidence impeaching the plaintiff's right to recover.]


[Footnote 33: NOTE 33. Page 461.

The late venerable and gifted Lord Stowell, in the case of _Evans_ v.
_Evans_, 1 Consistory Reports, p. 36.]


[Footnote 34: NOTE 34. Page 466.

Some have imagined this to be an allusion to a disclosure pretended by
M. Thiers, a few years ago, _after the death of Lord Holland_, to have
been made to him by that nobleman, of what had passed at a Cabinet
council!!]


END OF VOL. II.






End of Project Gutenberg's Ten Thousand a-Year (Vol. 2), by Samuel Warren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR (VOL. 2) ***

***** This file should be named 41332-0.txt or 41332-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/3/41332/

Produced by Matthias Grammel, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 3., by Samuel Warren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 3.

Author: Samuel Warren

Release Date: October 30, 2012 [EBook #41247]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. VOLUME 3. ***




Produced by Matthias Grammel, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










          TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.




                   TEN

            THOUSAND A-YEAR.


                   BY

          SAMUEL WARREN, F.R.S.


                VOL. III.


                 BOSTON:
       LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.
                  1900.




            University Press:
     JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




CONTENTS TO VOL. III.


   CHAP.                                                          PAGE

      I. The great game at chess, between Mr. Gammon and Mr.
           Crafty, which typifies an English election, and how
           it is lost and won.--The day of battle arrives            1

     II. The fight waxes hot; and after surprising fluctuation,
           a glorious victory is gained.--Serious incidents for
           the consideration of the victors, who have also to
           fight another battle on new ground.--Mr. Titmouse
           acquires sudden distinction in the House of
           Commons.--Mr. Titmouse becomes a Fellow of the
           Credulous Society, under the auspices of Dr. Diabolus
           Gander, performs scientific experiments in the
           streets at night, and saves the Ministry                 43

    III. Lady Cecilia is married to Mr. Titmouse; and the Earl
           enters, under Mr. Gammon's auspices, on an adventurous
           career.--An affecting letter of Lady
           Cecilia Titmouse.--A deadly struggle between a
           snake and an ape                                        124

     IV. Mr. Gammon offers his hand and heart to Miss Aubrey.
           An exciting love scene in which Kate behaves
           with great propriety.--Mr. Gammon's skilful
           manœuvres to crush Mr. Aubrey; and they seem
           seconded by fate                                        173

      V. Mr. Aubrey disregards Gammon's advice, and becomes
           the guest of Mr. Grab.--Mr. Gammon's profound
           strategies                                              218

     VI. Kate communicates a secret told her by Mr. Gammon,
           who secures her brother a night with Mr.
           Vice.--Kate's diamond necklace; Mr. Runnington's
           munificence; Lady Stratton's £15,000 policy, which
           Gammon angles for                                       260

    VII. The descent of the Vulture; and other matters of moment
           to Gammon.--The Artificial-Rain Company
           evaporates; and a remarkable scene between Mr.
           Gammon and the Earl of Dreddlington                     295

   VIII. The Earl of Dreddlington's bed-side; and Gammon's
           interview with the Duke of Tantallan.--Lord De la
           Zouch comes on the scene again; an Attorney-General's
           suggestion; and Gammon frightened by his
           own proctor.--Lord De la Zouch with the Aubreys         338

     IX. Mr. Gammon with the Earl of Dreddlington, whose
           intellect melts away before him. Mr. Gammon
           getting into deep waters and dragging his great
           friends after him.--What moles in the ecclesiastical
           court can do under ground                               378

      X. Glances of daylight into a glen of fraud, and reptiles
           seen wriggling about in alarm.--What is Gammon
           to do?--Mr. Titmouse makes an equitable proposal
           to Kate Aubrey.--The scorpion in the fiery circle.
           Mr. Gammon's skilful exit                               412

     XI. The Earl of Dreddlington's bankruptcy and death;
           and Lord Drelincourt appears on the scene.--Mudflint,
           Woodlouse, and Bloodsuck in a bad way; and
           Sir Harkaway's awkward position                         455

    XII. Mr. Titmouse on his last legs.--Mr. Tag-rag's final
           adventures; a sudden glimpse of Gammon again;
           and the last of Mr. Quirk.--True nobility; Yatton
           itself again; and Kate Aubrey's disappearance           488

    NOTES                                                          537




TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR.




CHAPTER I.


There had not been a contested election at Yatton, till the present one
between Mr. Delamere and Mr. Titmouse, for a long series of years; its
two members having been, till then, owing to the smallness of the
constituency, their comparative unanimity of political sentiment, and
the dominant influence of the Yatton family, returned, pretty nearly, as
a matter of course. When, therefore, quiet little Yatton (for such it
was, albeit politically enlarged by the new Act) became the scene of so
sudden and hot a contest as that which I am going to describe, and under
such novel and exciting circumstances, it seemed in a manner quite
beside itself. The walls were everywhere covered with glaring
placards--red, blue, green, yellow, white, purple--judiciously designed
to stimulate the electors into a calm and intelligent exercise of their
important functions. Here are the inscriptions upon a few of them:--

    "VOTE for TITMOUSE, the MAN of the PEOPLE!"
    "TITMOUSE and CIVIL and RELIGIOUS LIBERTY!"
    "TITMOUSE and CHEAP ALE!"
    "TITMOUSE and PURITY of ELECTION!"
    "TITMOUSE and NEGRO EMANCIPATION!"
    "VOTE for TITMOUSE and NO MISTAKE!"
    "TITMOUSE and QUARTERLY PARLIAMENTS, VOTE BY BALLOT,
      and UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE!"

['Twas thus that the name of my little friend, like that of many others
of his species, was attached to great public questions, somewhat after
the manner of a kettle tied to a dog's tail!]

But others were to be met with of a more elaborate and impressive
character.

    "Electors of Yatton!! Be not deceived!!! The enemy is among you!
    Do you wish to reap the full fruits of the glorious boon lately
    conferred on you? Rush to the poll, and VOTE for TITMOUSE. Do you
    wish to see them torn from your grasp by a selfish and arrogant
    aristocracy? _Get a pair of handcuffs_, and go and vote for--MR.
    DELAMERE!!!!

    "QUÆRE. If a _certain Boroughmongering Peer_ should command his son
    to vote for the REPEAL of the Great Bill which enfranchised the
    inhabitants of Grilston, Succombe, and Warkleigh--would not that
    son obey him? _How would this be_, MR. DELAMERE?"

'Twas not, to give the devil his due, Mr. Titmouse's fault that his
placards did not contain many vulgar personalities against his opponent;
but owing entirely to Mr. Gammon's want of the requisite wit and spirit.
That gentleman felt, in fact, that such a candidate as Mr. Delamere
afforded but few salient points of attack, in respect either of his
person, his position in society, or his conduct. He also, by the way,
had his placards:--

    "VOTE for DELAMERE!"
    "DELAMERE and INDEPENDENCE!"
    "VOTE for DELAMERE the FARMER'S FRIEND!"
    "DELAMERE and the CONSTITUTION IN CHURCH AND STATE!"

Both the candidates established their headquarters at Grilston; Mr.
Delamere at the "_Hare and Hounds_" Inn, Mr. Titmouse at the
"_Woodlouse_." Over the bow-window of the former streamed a noble blue
banner, with an emblazonment of the Bible and Crown, and the words,
"CHURCH, KING, and CONSTITUTION--OLD ENGLAND FOREVER!" Over the latter
hung an immense yellow banner, with three stars, thus:--

    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    | PEACE!        RETRENCHMENT!!  |
    |     *            *            |
    |              *                |
    |           REFORM!!!           |
    |                               |
    +-------------------------------+

(being the, "Three Polar Stars" spoken of in Mr. Titmouse's Address,)
and the words--"PEACE! RETRENCHMENT!! REFORM!!!" in immense gilt
letters. The walls and windows of each were, moreover, covered with
varicolored placards--but I shall not weary the reader by attempting to
describe in detail the humors of a country election, which have
employed, already, thousands of able and graphic pens and pencils.
Surely, what else are they than the sticks and straws which float along
the eddying and roughened surface? The whole mass of water is moving
along; and our object should be rather to discover its depth, force, and
direction. Principles are in conflict; the fate of the nation is, in a
measure, involved in a popular election. Such matters as I have alluded
to, are but the laughable devices resorted to, in order to delude the
grinning vulgar, and disguise the movements of those calm and
calculating persons who are playing the deep game of politics. Under
cover of a ludicrous hubbub, might be observed, for instance, in this
little borough--subject to certain petty local disturbing forces--a
deadly struggle for ascendency between the monarchical and the
democratical principle; between rampant innovation and obstinate
immobility; between the wealthy few and the many poor; between property
and ability. If anything like this _were_ the case, how many of the
electors--new or old--of Yatton--(who may perhaps be compared to
chessmen in the hands of long-headed players)--knew any more about the
matter than a private soldier at Waterloo thought of, comprehended, or
appreciated, the complicated and mighty schemes of a Wellington or
Napoleon, whose bidding he was doing, or of the prodigious consequences
attached to the success or failure of either? Some people talk
vehemently about the "paramount necessity for educating the lower
classes." It is, indeed, of incalculable importance that they should be
instructed; but is it not of still greater importance that the UPPER
CLASSES should be instructed, if only on account of their being the
holders of that PROPERTY, in greater or less proportions, with its
inseparable power and influence, which, directly or indirectly,
determines all the movements of the state? Could universal suffrage be
supposed to exist consistently with the preservation of social order--of
society--it would still be impossible to extirpate or effectually to
counteract the influence of property, in whose hands soever it might be
placed. Pluck out of the vilest of the bellowing bullies surrounding the
hustings, him (of course a non-elector) most conspicuous for his
insolence and brutality; imagine him suddenly or gradually become the
owner of a great, or a small property, with the influence it gives him
over customers, tenants, dependents: do you suppose that he will not at
once, either gently or roughly, according to his temper, begin to
exercise his power, (that which is so dear to the heart of man,) by
dictating the exercise of the elective franchise on behalf of those
political opinions which he may happen to favor? Is not THIS the man to
instruct, and the better in proportion to the extent of his real
influence? Except in those brief and horrid intervals of social
convulsion, in which [Greek: dika kai panta palin strepetai], however
popularized and extended may apparently be the system of electing
parliamentary representatives, those who really return members to
Parliament will--whether themselves actually electors or not, and
whether directly or indirectly--be the holders of property, in villages,
in towns, in cities, in boroughs and counties. The influence of property
is, in truth, inevitable as that of gravitation: and losing sight of
this, people may split their heads in vain, and chatter till the arrival
of the Greek kalends, about extending farther and farther the elective
franchise, shortening Parliaments, and voting by ballot. Whether it
_ought_ to be so, signifies little, when we know that it is, and _will_
be so:--but now it is time to return to the Yatton election; and if I be
but this once forgiven, I will not diverge again in a hurry from the
main course of events.

Lord De la Zouch, who resided some eight or ten miles from Yatton, soon
discovered, as also did sundry other able and experienced electioneering
friends, taking an interest in his son's success, that the movements of
the enemy were directed by a strong and skilful hand; and which never
could be that of--_Mr. Titmouse_. However slight and faint may be the
hopes of success with which a man enters into an interesting and
important undertaking, they very soon begin to increase and brighten
with eager action; and it was so with Lord De la Zouch. He was not long
in tracing the powerful, but cautiously concealed agency of our friend
Mr. Gammon. One or two such dangerous and artful snares were detected by
the watchful and practised eyes of his Lordship and his friends, just in
time to prevent Delamere from being seriously compromised, as satisfied
them that good Mr. Parkinson, with all his bustle, energy, and
heartiness, was dreadfully overmatched by his astute opponent, Mr.
Gammon; and that in the hands of Mr. Parkinson, the contest would
become, so far as Delamere was concerned, a painful and ridiculous
farce. A council of war, therefore, was called at Fotheringham Castle;
the result of which was an express being sent off to London, to bring
down immediately a first-rate electioneering agent--MR. CRAFTY--and
place in his hands the entire management of Mr. Delamere's cause. Mr.
Crafty was between forty and forty-five years old. His figure, of middle
height, was very spare. He was always dressed in a plain suit of black,
with white neckerchief, and no shirt-collar; yet no one that knew the
world could mistake him for a dissenting minister!--He was very calm and
phlegmatic in his manner and movements--there was not a particle of
passion or feeling in his composition. He was a mere _thinking machine_,
in exquisite order. He was of marvellous few words. His face was thin
and angular. His chin and temples formed an isosceles triangle; his chin
being very peaked, and his forehead broad. His hair was dark, and cut
almost as close as that of a foot-soldier--and this it was which helped
to give his countenance that expression, both quaint and unaffected,
which, once observed, was not likely to be soon forgotten. His eye was
blue, and intensely cold and bright--his complexion fresh; he had no
whiskers; there was a touch of sarcasm about the corners of his mouth.
Everything about him bespoke a man cold, cautious, acute,
matter-of-fact. "_Business_" was written all over his face. He had
devoted himself to electioneering tactics; and he might be said to have
reduced them, indeed, to a science. No one could say whether he was of
Whig or Tory politics; my impression is, that he cared not a straw for
either.--This, then, was the man who was to be pitted against Gammon:
and these two gentlemen may perhaps be looked upon as the real
_players_, whose _backers_ were--Delamere and Titmouse.

Mr. Crafty soon made his appearance at Yatton; and seemed, in a manner,
to have dropped into Mr. Delamere's committee-room from the clouds. His
presence did not appear _quite_ unexpected; yet no one seemed to know
why, whence, or at whose instance he had come. He never went near
Fotheringham, nor ever mentioned the name of its noble owner, who
(between ourselves) contemplated the accession of Crafty with feelings
of calm exultation and confidence. Mr. Delamere's "_committee_" was
instantly disbanded, and no new one named. In fact, _there was to be
none at all_; and Mr. Titmouse's friends were, for a while, led to
believe that the enemy were already beginning to beat a retreat. A quiet
banker at Grilston, and a hard-headed land-surveyor and agent of the
same place, were alone apparently taken into Mr. Crafty's confidence.
Mr. Parkinson, even, was sent to the right about; and his rising pique
and anger were suddenly quelled by the steadfast and significant look
with which Mr. Crafty observed, in dismissing him--"_It won't do_."
Adjoining, and opening into the large room in which, till Mr. Crafty's
arrival, Mr. Delamere's committee had been sitting, was a very small
one; and in it Mr. Crafty established his headquarters. He came,
accompanied--though no one for a while knew it--by three of his
familiars; right trusty persons, in sooth! One of them always sat on a
chair, at the outside of the door leading into Mr. Crafty's room, over
which he kept guard as a sentinel. The other two disposed themselves
according to orders. Mr. Gammon soon _felt_ the presence of his secret
and formidable opponent, in the total change--the quiet system--that
became all of a sudden apparent in the enemy's tactics: his watchful eye
and quick perception detected, here and there, the faint vanishing
traces of a sly and stealthy foot--the evidences of experienced skill;
and one morning early he caught a glimpse of Mr. Crafty, (with whose
name and fame he was familiar,) and returned home with a grave
consciousness that the contest had become one exceedingly serious;
that--so to speak--he must instantly spread out every stitch of canvas
to overtake the enemy. In short, he made up his mind for mischief, as
soon as he gave Lord De la Zouch credit for being _resolved to win_; and
felt the necessity for acting with equal caution and decision. During
that day he obtained an advance from a neighboring banker of two
thousand pounds, on the security of a deposit of a portion of the
title-deeds of the Yatton property. He had, indeed, occasion for great
resources, personal as well as pecuniary; for instance--he had reason to
believe that the enemy had already penetrated to his stronghold, the
QUAINT CLUB at Grilston, (for that was the name of the club into which
the one hundred and nine new voters at Grilston had formed themselves.)
Though Gammon had agreed, after much negotiation, to buy them at the
very liberal sum of ten pounds a-head, he had reason, shortly after the
arrival of Mr. Crafty, to believe that they had been tampered with; for,
as he was late one evening moodily walking up to the Hall, he overtook,
in the park, a man whose person he did not at first recognize in the
darkness, but whose fearfully significant motions soon insured him
recognition. It was, in fact, the man who had hitherto treated with him
on behalf of the Quaint Club; one Benjamin Bran, (commonly called _Ben
Bran_,) a squat, bow-legged baker of Grilston. He uttered not a word,
nor did Mr. Gammon; but, on being recognized, simply held up to that
gentleman his two outstretched hands, _twice_, with a significant and
inquiring look. Gammon gazed at him for a moment with fury; and
muttering--"to-morrow--here--same hour!" hurried on to the Hall in a
state of the utmost perplexity and alarm. The dilemma in which he felt
himself, kept him awake half the night! When once, indeed, you come to
_this sort of work_, you are apt to give your opponent credit for deeper
manœuvring than you can at the time fully appreciate; and the fate
of the battle may soon be rendered really doubtful. Then,
everything--inclusive of serious consequences, extending far beyond the
mere result of the election--depends upon the skill, temper, and
experience of the real and responsible directors of the election. Was
Ben Bran's appearance a move on the part of Crafty? Had that gentleman
bought him over and converted him into a spy--was he now playing the
traitor? Or was the purse of Titmouse to be _bonâ fide_ measured against
that of Lord De la Zouch? _That would be dreadful!_ Gammon felt (to
compare him for a moment to an animal with which he had some kindred
qualities) much like a cat on a very high wall, topped with broken
glass, afraid to stir in any direction, and yet unable to continue where
he was. While the two candidates, attended by their sounding bands, and
civil and smiling friends, were making their public demonstrations and
canvassing the electors, as if thereby they exercised the slightest
possible influence over one single voter on either side; as I have
already intimated, the battle was being fought by two calm and crafty
heads, in two snug and quiet little rooms in Grilston--one at the Hare
and Hounds, the other at the Woodlouse Inn; of course, I mean Mr.
Crafty, and Mr. Gammon. The former within a very few hours saw that the
issue of the struggle lay with the Quaint Club; and from one of his
trusty emissaries--a man whom no one ever saw in communication with him,
who was a mere stranger in Grilston, indifferent as to the result of the
election, but delighting in its frolics; who was peculiarly apt to get
sooner drunk than any one he drank with--Mr. Crafty ascertained, that
though the enlightened members of the Quaint Club had certainly formed a
predilection for the principles of Mr. Titmouse, yet they possessed a
candor which disposed them to hear all that might be advanced in favor
of the principles of his opponent.

Mr. Crafty's first step was to ascertain what had been already done or
attempted on behalf of Mr. Delamere, and also of Mr. Titmouse; then the
exact number of the voters, whom he carefully classified. He found that
there were exactly four hundred who might be expected to poll; the new
electors amounting in number to one hundred and sixty, the old ones to
two hundred and forty, and principally scot-and-lot voters. In due time
he ascertained, that of the former class only _thirty-six_ could be
relied upon for Mr. Delamere. The tenants of the Yatton property within
the borough amounted to one hundred and fifteen. They had been canvassed
by Mr. Delamere and his friends with great delicacy; and twenty-three of
them had voluntarily pledged themselves to vote for him, and risk all
consequences; intimating that they hated and despised their new landlord
as much as they had loved their old one, whose principles they
understood to be those of Mr. Delamere. Then there remained a class of
"_accessibles_," (to adopt the significant language of Mr. Crafty,) in
number one hundred and twenty-five. These were persons principally
resident in and near Yatton, subject undoubtedly to strong and direct
influence on the part of Mr. Titmouse, but still not absolutely at his
command. Of these no fewer than seventy had pledged themselves in favor
of Mr. Delamere; and, in short, thus stood Mr. Crafty's calculations as
to the probable force on both sides:--

      DELAMERE.                   TITMOUSE.

    New Voters           36     New Voters--
    Yatton Tenants       23         _Quaint Club_     109
    Accessibles          70         Others             21
                        ---                           --- 130
                        129
                                    Tenants                92
                                    Accessibles            35
                                                          ---
                                                          257

Now, of the class of _accessibles_, twenty remained yet unpledged, and
open to conviction; and, moreover, both parties had good ground for
believing that they would _all_ be convinced _one way_--_i. e._ towards
either Mr. Titmouse or Mr. Delamere. Now, if the Quaint Club could be in
any way detached from Mr. Titmouse, it would leave him with a majority
of _seventeen_, only, over Mr. Delamere; and then, if by any means the
twenty accessibles could be secured for Mr. Delamere, he would be placed
in a majority of three over his opponent. Whichever way _they_ went,
however, it was plain that the Quaint Club held the election in their
own hands, and intended to keep it so. Gammon's calculations differed
but slightly from those of Crafty; and thenceforth both directed their
best energies towards the same point, the Quaint Club--going on all the
while with undiminished vigor and assiduity with their canvass, as the
best mode of diverting attention from their important movements, and
satisfying the public that the only weapons with which the fight was to
be won were--bows, smiles, civil speeches, placards, squibs, banners,
and bands of music. Mr. Crafty had received a splendid sum for his
services from Lord De la Zouch; but on the first distinct and peremptory
intimation from his Lordship, being conveyed to him through Mr.
Delamere, that there was to be, _bonâ fide_, no bribery--and that the
only funds placed at his disposal were those sufficient for the
_legitimate_ expenses of the election--he smiled rather bitterly, and
sent off a secret express to Fotheringham, to ascertain _for what_ his
services had been engaged--since what was the use of going to Waterloo
_without powder_?--The answer he received was laconic enough, and
verbatim as follows:--

     "No intimidation; no treating; no bribery; _manœuvre_ as skilfully
     as you can; _and watch the enemy night and day_, so that the close
     of the poll may not be the close of the election, nor the victor
     there, the sitting member."

To the novel, arduous, and cheerless duty, defined by this despatch from
headquarters, Mr. Crafty immediately addressed all his energies; and,
after carefully reconnoitring his position, unpromising as it was, he
did not _despair_ of success. All his own voters had been gained, upon
the whole, fairly. The thirty-six new ones had been undoubtedly under
considerable _influence_, of an almost inevitable kind indeed--inasmuch
as they consisted of persons principally employed in the way of business
by Lord De la Zouch, and by many of his friends and neighbors, all of
whom were of his Lordship's way of political thinking. Every one of the
twenty-three tenants had given a spontaneous and cordial promise; and
the seventy "accessibles" had been gained, after a very earnest and
persevering canvass, by Mr. Delamere, in company with others who had a
pretty decisive, but still a legitimate influence over them. The
remaining twenty might, possibly, though not probably, be secured by
equally unobjectionable means. That being the state of things with
Delamere, how stood matters with Mr. Titmouse? First and foremost, the
Quaint Club had been bought at ten pounds a-head, by Gammon--that was
all certain. Crafty would also have bought them like a flock of sheep,
had he been allowed, and would have managed matters most effectually and
secretly; yet not more so than he found Mr. Gammon had succeeded in
doing; at all events, as far as that gentleman himself, personally, was
concerned. In fact, he had foiled Mr. Crafty, when that astute person
looked about in search of legal evidence of what had been done. Still,
however, he did not despair of being able to perform a series
manœuvres which should secure one of the ends he most wished, in
respect even of the Quaint Club. With equal good intentions, but
actuated by a _zeal that was not according to knowledge_, some of Mr.
Gammon's coadjutors had not imitated his circumspection. Quite unknown
to him, one or two of them had most fearfully committed him, themselves,
and Mr. Titmouse; giving Mr. Gammon such accounts of their doings as
should serve only to secure his applause for their tact and success.
Before Mr. Crafty, however, they stood detected as blundering novices in
the art of electioneering. A small tinker and brazier at Warkleigh had
received, with a wink, ten pounds from _a member of Mr. Titmouse's
committee!_ in payment of an old outstanding account--Heaven save the
mark!--delivered in by him, three years before, for mending pots,
kettles, and sauce-pans, in the time of--the Aubreys! The wife of a
tailor at Grilston received the same sum for a fine tomcat, which was a
natural curiosity, since it could wink each eye separately and
successively. A third worthy and independent voter was reminded that he
had lent the applicant for his vote ten pounds several years before, and
which that gentleman now took shame to himself, as he paid the amount,
for having so long allowed to remain unpaid. Mr. Barnabas Bloodsuck,
with superior astuteness, gave three pounds a-piece to three little
boys, sons of a voter, whose workshop overlooked Messrs. Bloodsucks'
back offices, on condition that they would desist from their trick of
standing and putting their thumbs to their noses and extending their
fingers towards him, as he sat in his office, and which had really
become an insupportable nuisance. Here was, therefore, a _valuable
consideration_ for the payment, and bribery was out of the question!
Such are samples of the ingenious devices which had been resorted to, in
order to secure some thirty or forty votes! In short, Mr. Crafty caught
them tripping in at least eleven clear, unquestionable cases of bribery,
each supported by unimpeachable evidence, and each sufficing to avoid
the election, to disqualify Mr. Titmouse from sitting in that Parliament
for Yatton, and to subject both him and his agents to a ruinous amount
of penalties. Then, again, there were clear indications either of a
disposition to set at defiance the stringent provisions of the law
against TREATING, or of an ignorance of their existence. And as for
_freedom_ of election, scarcely ten of his tenants gave him a willing
vote, or otherwise than upon compulsion, and after threats of raised
rents or expulsion from farms. Tied as were Mr. Crafty's hands, the
Quaint Club became a perfect eyesore to him. He found means, however, to
open a secret and confidential communication with them, and resolved to
hold out to them dazzling but indistinct hopes of pecuniary advantage
from the regions of Fotheringham. His emissary soon got hold of the
redoubtable Ben Bran, who, truth to say, had long been on the look-out
for indications of the desired sort, from the other side. As Bran was
late one evening walking slowly alone along the high-road leading to
York, he was accosted by a genteel-looking person, who spoke in a low
tone, and whom Bran now recollected to have seen, or spoken to, before.
"Can you tell me where lies the gold mine?" said the stranger; "at
Fotheringham, or Yatton?"--and the speaker looked round, apprehensive of
being overheard. Ben pricked up his ears, and soon got into conversation
with the mysterious stranger; in the course of which the latter threw
out, in a very significant manner, that "a certain peer could never be
supposed to send a certain near relative into the field, in order that
that relative might be beaten, ... and especially for want of a few
pounds; and besides, my friend, when only ...--eh?--...--_the other
side_"----

"Why, who are you? Where do you come from?" inquired Ben, with a violent
start.

"Dropped out of the--_moon_," was the quiet and smiling answer.

"Then I must say they know a precious deal," replied Ben, after a
troubled pause, "up there, of what's going on down here."

"To be sure, everything; everything!"... Here the stranger told Ben the
precise sum which the club had received from Mr. Gammon.

"Are we both--gentlemen?" inquired the stranger, earnestly.

"Y--e--e--s, I hope so, sir," replied Ben Bran, hesitatingly.

"And men of business--men of our word?"

"Honor among thieves--ay, ay," answered Ben, in a still lower tone, and
very eagerly.

"Then let you and me meet _alone_, this time to-morrow, at Darkling
Edge; and by that time, do you see, turn this over in your mind," here
the stranger twice held up both his hands, with outstretched thumbs and
fingers. "_Sure_ we understand each other?" he added. Ben nodded, and
they were presently out of sight of each other. The stranger immediately
pulled off his green spectacles, and also a pair of gray whiskers, and
put both of them into his pocket. If any one attempted to _dog_ him, he
must have been led a pretty round! 'Twas in consequence of this
interview that Ben made the application to Gammon, which had so
disturbed him, and which has been already described. And to return to
our friend: what was he to do? On entering the library at the Hall, he
opened a secret drawer in his desk, and took out a thin slip of paper
which he had deposited there that morning, it having been then received
by him from town, marked "_Private and Confidential_," and franked
"BLOSSOM and BOX." 'Twas but a line, and written in a bold hand, but in
evident haste; for it had in fact been penned by Lord Blossom and Box
while he was sitting in the Court of Chancery. This is a copy of it:--

     "The election _must_ be won. You will hear from E---- by this post.
     Don't address any note to _me_.

                                                             "B. and B."

With this great man, Lord Chancellor Blossom and Box, when plain Mr.
Quicksilver, Mr. Gammon had had a pretty familiar acquaintance, as the
reader may easily suppose; and had a natural desire to acquit himself
creditably in the eyes of so distinguished and powerful a personage.
Gammon had volunteered an assurance to his Lordship, shortly before
leaving town, that the election was safe, and in his (Gammon's) hands;
guess, then, his chagrin and fury at finding the systematic and
determined opposition which had suddenly sprung up against him; and the
intensity of his desire to defeat it. And the more anxious he was on
this score, the more vividly he perceived the necessity of acting with a
caution which should insure real ultimate success, instead of a mere
noisy and temporary triumph, which should be afterwards converted into
most galling, disgraceful, and public defeat. The more that Gammon
reflected on the sudden but determined manner in which Lord De la Zouch
had entered into the contest, the more confident he became that his
Lordship had an important ultimate object to secure; and that he had at
command immense means of every description, Gammon but too well knew, in
common with all the world. Was, for instance, Mr. Crafty brought down,
at an enormous expense, for nothing? What the deuce were the Quaint Club
about? Was ever anything so monstrous heard of--ten pounds a man
actually received--the bargain finally struck--and now their original
demand suddenly and peremptorily doubled? Venal miscreants! Were his
opponents really outbidding him, or laying a deep plan for entrapping
him into an act of wholesale bribery? In short, were the Quaint Club now
actuated by avarice, or by treachery? Again and again did he go over his
list of promises; having marked the _favorable_, _hostile_, _neutral_,
_doubtful_, from a table as accurately compiled and classified as that
of Mr. Crafty. Like his wily and practised opponent, also, Gammon
intrusted his principal movements to scarce a soul of those who were
engaged with him; fearing, indeed, though _then_ with no definite
grounds, that Messrs. Mudflint, Woodlouse, Centipede, Bloodsuck, and
Going Gone, were already too deep in the secrets of the election.
According to _his_ calculations, supposing all his promises to stand,
Titmouse was, independently of the Quaint Club, and some eighteen or
twenty others whom he had set down as "_to be had_"--only _twenty-five_
a-head of Delamere; thus making a difference of eight only between
Gammon's reckoning, and that of Crafty. Of course, therefore, that
cursed Quaint Club had it all their own way; and how to jockey them, was
a problem which well-nigh split his head. He gave Lord De la Zouch
credit for doing all that he--Gammon--would do, to win the election; and
believed him, therefore, capable of buying over any number of the club,
to turn king's evidence against their _original_ benefactor. The
Bloodsucks assured him that the club were all good men and
true--stanch--game to the backbone; but Gammon had obtained some
information as to the political sentiments of several of the members,
before they had acquired the new franchise, and become banded into so
sudden and formidable a confederacy, which led him to speculate rather
apprehensively on the effects which might follow any bold and skilful
scheme resorted to by his enemies. Now, as far as the club were
concerned, its members were all quiet respectable men, who made the
affair a dry matter of business. They justly looked on each of the
candidates as equally worthy of the honor they coveted of representing
the borough, and considered that things would always go on right, at
headquarters--_i. e._ that the country would be properly
governed--without the least reference to the quality or complexion of
the House of Commons. They saw the desperate and unceasing fight among
their betters for the loaves and fishes; and imitated their example,
with reference to the crumbs and fragments. First they divided
themselves, as near as their number would admit of, into tens, giving
one to the odd nine, equally with each body of ten, and thus produced a
body of eleven representatives. These eleven, again, in the presence of
the whole club, chose five of their number for the purpose of conducting
the negotiations between the club and the two candidates; and these five
again selected one of themselves--Ben Bran--to be the direct medium of
communication: the actual state of the market never went beyond the
first body of eleven; and in the exercise of an exquisite dexterity, Mr.
Crafty had contrived to inspire these eleven, through their deputy and
mouthpiece, Bran, with a determination to exact _fifteen_ pounds per
head more from Titmouse, before recording their votes in his favor: and
this untoward state of things was duly intimated to Gammon, by Ben Bran,
by silently outstretching both hands, and then one hand. That would make
a total of _two thousand seven hundred and twenty-five pounds_ disbursed
among that accursed Quaint Club alone!--thought Gammon with a shudder:
and suppose they should even then turn tail upon him, seduced by the
splendid temptations of Lord De la Zouch? Just to conceive the
possibility, for one moment, of Mr. Benjamin Bran having been bought
over to betray all his companions, and Gammon and his party also, into
the hands of Lord De la Zouch? Saith the immortal author of
_Hudibras_--

    "Ah me, what perils do environ
    The man that meddles with cold iron!"

But Gammon was disposed to make an exclamation in a similar tone, though
of a different sort--

    What pen his troubles shall describe,
    Who voters once begins to bribe!

"Oh!" thought Mr. Gammon, a thousand times, "that cursed Quaint
Club!--That cursed Crafty!"

The very first person on whom Delamere waited, in order to solicit his
support, was little Dr. Tatham, who, I need hardly say, gave it promptly
and cordially; but he added, shaking his head, that he knew he was
giving huge offence to the people at the Hall, who had already been
several times very urgent indeed with him. "Well, rather, sir, than sow
dissension between you and Mr. Titmouse, your neighbor," said Delamere,
spiritedly, "I at once release you from your promise."

"Ah! indeed?" cried Dr. Tatham, briskly--"Do you? _Can_ you? Ought you
to do so? I look upon the exercise of my franchise to be a sacred duty,
and I shall discharge it as readily and as conscientiously as any other
duty, come what may." Delamere looked at him, and thought how often he
had heard Miss Aubrey talk of him with affectionate enthusiasm, and he
believed the little doctor to be every way worthy of it. "For myself,"
continued Dr. Tatham, "I care little; but I have reason greatly to
apprehend the effects of his displeasure upon those who are disposed--as
such I know there are--to go counter to his wishes. He'll make them rue
the day."

"Ay?--Let him!" exclaimed Mr. Delamere, with an eye of bright defiance;
but it kindled only a faint momentary spark of consolation in the
breast of Dr. Tatham.

The rivals, Mr. Delamere and Mr. Titmouse, encountered one another, as
it were in full state, on the second day of the former's canvass. 'T was
in the street. Mr. Delamere was attended by Mr. Parkinson, Sir Percival
Pickering, Mr. St. Aubyn, Mr. Aylward Elvet, Mr. Gold, and one or two
others. Mr. Delamere looked certainly very handsome. About his person,
countenance, and carriage, there was an air of manly frankness,
refinement, and simplicity; and a glance at his aristocratic cast of
features, told you that a certain latent tendency to _hauteur_ was kept
in check by sincere good-nature. He was tall and well-proportioned, and
his motions had a natural ease and grace; and as for his dress, it
combined a rigid simplicity with an undoubted fashion and elegance.
Though the air was very cold and frosty, he wore only a plain
dark-colored surtout, buttoned.

"Delamere! Delamere!" whispered, with a smile, Mr. St. Aubyn, (one of
the former members for the borough,) on first catching sight of the
enemy approaching them on the same side of the street, at about twenty
yards' distance--"Here comes your opponent; he's a little beauty, eh?"

Mr. Titmouse walked first, dressed in a fine drab-colored great-coat,
with velvet collar of the same hue, and sable near a foot deep at the
wrists. It was buttoned tightly round a pinched-in waist, and a white
cambric handkerchief peeped out of a pocket in the breast. He had a red
and green plaid waistcoat, and a full satin stock, glistening with
little pins and chains. His trousers were sky-blue, and very tight, and
covered almost the whole of his boot; so that it was a wonder to the
vulgar how he ever got into, or out of them. The little that was seen of
his boots shone wonderfully; and he wore spurs at his heels. His
span-new glossy hat was perched aslant on his bushy hair; he wore
lemon-colored kid gloves, and carried a delicate little ebony cane.
Following this pretty figure were--the sallow insolent-looking
"_Reverend_" Smirk Mudflint, (such was the title he assumed,) Mr.
Centipede, Mr. Grogram, Mr. Bloodsuck, junior, (who had approached as
near, in point of personal appearance, to his illustrious client, as he
knew how,) and--Mr. Gammon. As the hostile companies neared each other,
that of Delamere observed some one hastily whisper to Titmouse, who
instantly stuck his chased gold eyeglass into his eye, and stared very
vulgarly at Mr. Delamere--who, on passing him, with the courtesy which
he conceived due to an opponent, took off his hat, and bowed with
politeness and grace, his example being followed by all his party.
Titmouse, however, took not the least notice of the compliment; but,
without removing his glass from his eye, throwing an odious sneer into
his face, stared steadily at Mr. Delamere, and so passed on. Mr.
Barnabas Bloodsuck ably seconded him. Mudflint, with a bitter smirk,
touched his hat slightly; Centipede affected to look another way;
Grogram blushed, and bowed as to his very best customer. Mr. Gammon came
last; and filled with disgust at the reception given to Mr. Delamere,
colored all over, as he took off his hat, and with an expression of very
anxious and pointed politeness, endeavored to satisfy Mr. Delamere and
his party, that there was at all events _one_ in the train of Titmouse,
who had some pretensions to the character of a gentleman.

"Who _can_ that last man be? He's a gentleman," inquired Sir Percival,
with an air of much surprise.

"Mr. Gammon--a man who is lord-paramount at the Hall," replied one.

"Gammon!--Is _that_ Mr.----" echoed Delamere, with much interest; and as
he turned round to look at Gammon, observed that he was doing the same;
on which both hastily turned away.

As the important day approached, each party _professed_ complete
confidence as to the result. The _Yorkshire Stingo_ declared that it had
authority for stating that Mr. Titmouse's majority would be at least
three to one over Mr. Delamere--and that, too, in glorious defiance of
the most lavish bribery and corruption, and the most tyrannical
intimidation, which had ever disgraced the annals of electioneering. In
fact, it was presumptuous in Mr. Delamere to attempt to foist himself
upon a borough with which he had no connection; and was done with a
wanton and malicious determination to occasion expense and annoyance to
Mr. Titmouse. The _York True Blue_, on the contrary, assured its readers
that Mr. Delamere's prospects were of the brightest description--and
though by perhaps a small majority, yet he was sure of his election. He
had been everywhere hailed with the greatest enthusiasm. Many of even
Mr. Titmouse's tenantry had nobly volunteered their support to Mr.
Delamere; and at Grilston, so long regarded as the very focus and hotbed
of democracy, his success had surpassed the most sanguine expectations
of his friends, and so forth. Then there was a sly and mischievous
caution to the electors, not to be led away by the ingenious and
eloquent sophistries which might be expected from Mr. Titmouse at the
hustings, on the day of nomination!! All this might be very well for the
papers, and probably produce its impression upon those who, at a
distance, are in the habit of relying upon them. But as for the
actors--the parties concerned--Mr. Delamere was repeatedly assured by
Mr. Crafty that a decent minority was the very utmost that could be
expected; while Titmouse and his friends, on the other hand, were in a
very painful state of uncertainty as to the issue: only Gammon, however,
and perhaps one or two others, being acquainted with the true source of
uneasiness and difficulty--viz. the abominable rapacity of the Quaint
Club.

At length dawned the day which was to determine how far Yatton was
worthy or unworthy of the boon which had been conferred upon it by the
glorious Bill for giving Everybody Everything--which was to witness the
maiden contest between the two hopeful scions of the noble and ancient
houses of Dreddlington and De la Zouch--on which it was to be
ascertained whether Yatton was to be bought and sold, like any other
article of merchandise, by a bitter old boroughmonger; or to signalize
itself by its spirit and independence, in returning one who avowed, and
would support, the noble principles which secured the passing of the
Great Bill which has been so often alluded to. As for my hero, Mr.
Titmouse, it gives me pain to have to record--making even all due
allowance for the excitement occasioned by so exhilarating an
occasion--that during the canvass, there were scarcely two hours in the
day during which he could be considered as sober. He generally left his
bed about eleven o'clock in the morning--about two o'clock, reached his
committee-room--there he called for a bottle or two of soda-water, with
brandy; and, thus supported, set out on his canvass, and never refused
an invitation to take a glass of ale, at the houses which he visited.
About the real business of the election--about his own true position and
prospects--Gammon never once deigned to consult or instruct him; but had
confined himself to the preparation of a very short and simple speech,
to be delivered by Titmouse, if possible, from the hustings, and which
he had made that gentleman copy out many times, and _promise_ that he
would endeavor to learn off by heart. He might as well, however, have
attempted to walk up the outside of the Monument!

Merrily rang the bells of Grilston church on the election morning, by
order of the vicar, the Reverend Gideon Fleshpot, who was a stanch
Titmousite, and had long cast a sort of sheep's eye upon the living of
Yatton; for he was nearly twenty years younger than its present
possessor, Dr. Tatham. What a bustle was there in the town by eight
o'clock! All business was to be suspended for the day. Great numbers
from the places adjacent began to pour into the town about that hour. It
was soon seen who was the popular candidate--he whose colors were
_yellow_; for wherever you went, yellow cockades, rosettes, and
button-ties for the men, and yellow ribbons for the girls, yellow flags
and yellow placards with "TITMOUSE FOR YATTON!" met the eye. Mr.
Delamere's colors were a deep blue, but were worn, I am sorry to say, by
only one in four or five of those who were stirring about; and who,
moreover, however respectable, and in appearance superior to the
adherents of Titmouse, yet wore no such look of confidence and
cheerfulness as they. From the bow-window of the Hare and Hounds, Mr.
Delamere's headquarters, streamed an ample and very rich blue silk
banner, on which was worked, in white silk, the figure of a Bible,
Crown, and Sceptre, and the words, "Delamere for Yatton." This would
have probably secured some little favorable notice from his sullen and
bitter opponents, had they known that it had been the workmanship of
some fifteen of as sweet beautiful girls as could have been picked out
of the whole county of York; and, by the way, 'tis a singular and
melancholy sign of the times, that beauty, innocence, and
accomplishment, are in England to be found uniformly arrayed on the side
of tyranny and corruption, against the people. Then Mr. Delamere's
_band_ was equal to three such as that of his opponent--playing with
equal precision and power: and, what was more, they played very bold,
enlivening tunes as they paraded the town. There was one feature of the
early proceedings of the day, that was rather singular and significant:
viz. that though all the members of the formidable QUAINT CLUB were
stirring about, _not one of them wore the colors of either party_,
though (between ourselves) each man had the colors of both parties in
his pocket. They appeared studiously to abstain from a display of party
feeling--though several of them _could_ not resist a leering wink of the
eye when the yellow band went clashing past them. They also had a band,
which went about the town, preceded by their own standard--a very broad
sheet of sky-blue, stretched between two poles, supported by two men;
and the droll device it bore, was--an enormous man's face, with an
intense squint, and two hands, with the thumbs of each resting on the
nose, and the fingers spread out towards the beholder. It produced--as
it seemed designed to produce--shouts of laughter wherever it made its
appearance. Every member of the Quaint Club, however, wore a grave face;
as if they were the only persons who appreciated the nature of the
exalted functions which they were entitled, and about to exercise. No
one could tell which way they intended to vote, though all expected that
they were to come in at the last, and place the yellows in a triumphant
majority of a hundred, at least. Though it had been a matter of
notoriety that they were Mr. Titmouse's men, before Mr. Delamere
appeared in the field; yet, _since_ then, they had suddenly exhibited a
politic and persevering silence and reserve, even among their personal
friends and acquaintance. The yellow band performed one feat which was
greatly applauded by the yellow crowd which attended them, and evidenced
the delicacy by which those who guided their movements were actuated:
viz. they frequently passed and repassed Mr. Delamere's committee-room,
playing that truly inspiriting air, "The Rogue's March." Then the
yellows dressed up a poor old donkey in Mr. Delamere's colors, which
were plentifully attached to the animal's ears and tail, and paraded
him, with great cheering, before the doors of the Hare and Hounds, and
Mr. Delamere's principal friends and adherents. Nay--one of the more
vivacious of the crowd threw a stone at a little corner window of the
blue committee-room, through which it went smashing on its way, till it
hit and overturned the inkstand of calm Mr. Crafty, who sat alone in the
little room, busy at work with pen, ink, and paper. He looked up for a
moment, called for a fresh inkstand, and presently resumed his pen, as
if nothing had happened.

The hustings were erected upon a very convenient and commodious green,
at the southern extremity of the town; and thither might be seen, first
on its way, a little after eleven o'clock, the procession of the popular
candidate--Mr. Titmouse. Here and there might be heard, as he passed,
the startling sounds of mimic ordnance, fired by little boys from
house-tops. As they passed the church, its bells rang their merriest
peal; and, at a little distance farther on, the little boys of Mr. Hic
Hæc Hoc, each with a small rosette tied to his jacket, struck up a
squeaking and enthusiastic "hurrah!" while from the upper windows, the
young ladies (three in number) of Mrs. Hic Hæc Hoc's "establishment,"
waved their little white pocket-handkerchiefs. Next on their way, they
passed the "_Reverend_" Smirk Mudflint's chapel, which was in very queer
contiguity to an establishment of a very queer character--in fact,
adjoining it. Against the upper part of the chapel hung a device
calculated to arrest, as it _did_ arrest, universal attention--viz. an
_inverted_ copy of the New Testament; over it, the figure of a church
turned upside down, with the point of its steeple resting on the word
"Revelation;" and upon the aforesaid church stood proudly erect an
exact representation of Mr. Smirk Mudflint's chapel, over which were the
words--"FREEDOM OF OPINION! and TRUTH TRIUMPHANT!" But I do not know
whether another device, worked by Miss Mudflint--a skinny, tallow-faced,
and flinty-hearted young lady of nine-and-twenty--was not still more
striking and original; viz. a Triangle and an Eye with rays, and the
words--"_Titmouse_! _Truth_! _Peace_!" Three cheers for Mr. Mudflint
were given here; and Mr. Mudflint bowed all round with an air of proud
excitement--feeling, moreover, an intense desire to stop the procession
and make a speech, while opposite to his own little dunghill.

First in the procession marched a big fellow with one eye, bearing a
flag, with a red cap on a pike, and the words, in large black
characters--

                         "TITMOUSE or DEATH!!!

                       "LET TYRANTS TREMBLE!!!!"

Then came the band, and next to them walked--TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, Esq.,
dressed exactly as he was when he encountered, in their canvass, the
party of his opponent, as I have already described--only that he wore a
yellow rosette, attached to a button-hole on the left side of his drab
great-coat. His protuberant light blue eyes danced with delight, and his
face was flushed with excitement. His hat was off and on every moment,
in acknowledgment of the universal salutations which greeted him, and
which so occupied him that he even forgot to use his eyeglass. On his
left hand walked, wrapped up in a plain dark-hued great-coat, a somewhat
different person--Mr. Gammon. The expression which his features wore was
one of intense anxiety; and any tolerably close observer might have
detected the mortification and disgust with which his eye occasionally
glanced at, and was as suddenly withdrawn from, the figure of the
grinning idiot beside him. Who do you think, reader, walked on Mr.
Titmouse's right-hand side? Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire, Baronet; whose
keen political feelings, added to a sincere desire to secure a chance of
his daughter's becoming the mistress of Yatton, had long ago obliterated
all unkindly recollection of Mr. Titmouse's gross conduct on a former
occasion, after having received, through the medium of Mr. Bloodsuck,
senior, as a common friend, a satisfactory apology. Next walked Mr.
Titmouse's mover and seconder, the "_Reverend_" Mr. Mudflint, and Going
Gone, "_Esquire_." Then came Mr. Centipede and Mr. Woodlouse, Mr.
Grogram and Mr. Ginblossom; Mr. Gargle Glister, Mr. Barnabas Bloodsuck,
and Mr. Hic Hæc Hoc; and others of the leading friends of Mr. Titmouse,
followed by some two hundred of others, two and two. Thus passed along
the main street of Grilston, in splendid array, what might too truly
have been called the _triumphal_ procession of the popular candidate;
his progress being accompanied by the enlivening music of his band, the
repeated acclamations of the excited and intelligent crowd, the waving
of banners and flags below, and handkerchiefs and scarfs from the ladies
at the windows, and desperate strugglings from time to time, on the part
of the crowd, to catch a glimpse of Mr. Titmouse. Mr. Gammon had the day
before judiciously hired ten pounds' worth of mob--a device alone
sufficient to have made Mr. Titmouse the popular candidate, and it now
told excellently; for the aforesaid ten pounds' worth disposed itself in
truly admirable order, in front of the hustings--and, on Mr. Titmouse's
making his appearance there, set up a sudden and enthusiastic shout,
which rent the air, and was calculated to strike dismay into the heart
of the enemy. Mr. Titmouse, on gaining the hustings, changed color
visibly, and, coming in front, took off his glossy hat, and bowed
repeatedly in all directions. Mr. Delamere's procession was of a vastly
superior description, yet too palpably that of the unpopular
candidate--every member of it from first to last, having made up his
mind to encounter incivility, and even insult, however really anxious to
avoid the slightest occasion for it. The band was numerous, and played
admirably. There was a profusion of gay and handsome flags and banners.
Mr. Delamere walked next to the musicians, with a gallant bearing, a gay
and cheerful smile, yet oft darkened by anxiety as he perceived
indubitable symptoms of a disposition to rough treatment on the part of
the crowd. On his right-hand side walked Mr. St. Aubyn; on his left, Sir
Percival Pickering, the late member for the borough. Following them came
Mr. Gold, the banker, and Mr. Milnthorpe, an extensive and
highly-respectable flour factor--these being Mr. Delamere's mover and
seconder: and they were followed by at least three hundred others, two
and two, all of a substantial and respectable appearance, and most
resolute air, to boot. No amount of mob, that day, in Grilston, would
have ventured an attack, in passing, upon that stout-hearted body of
yeomen. A great many white handkerchiefs were waved from the windows, as
Delamere passed along--waved by the hands of hundreds of fair creatures,
whose hearts throbbed with fond fears lest an unoffending gentleman
should be maltreated by the reckless mob. When Mr. Delamere approached a
certain prominent window, opposite to the town hall, his heart began to
beat quickly. _There_ were four as beautiful and high-born young women
as England could have produced, all gazing down upon him with eager and
anxious looks. It was not they, however, who occasioned Mr. Delamere's
emotion. He knew that in that room was Lady De la Zouch--_his mother_;
and he grew silent and excited as he approached it. One of the loveliest
of the four, as he stopped and with respectful bow looked up for an
instant--Lady Alethea Lorymer--suddenly and quite unexpectedly
stepped aside; and there stood revealed the figure of Lady De la Zouch.
She would have waved her handkerchief, but that she required it to
conceal her emotion. The lips of neither mother nor son moved; but their
_hearts_ uttered reciprocal benedictions--and Delamere passed on. As he
neared the church, I regret to have it to put on record, but at the
bidding of the Reverend Gideon Fleshpot, the bells _tolled as for a
funeral_!!

Could anything have been more lamentable and disgusting? If the sudden
and unexpected sight of his mother had been calculated in any degree to
subdue, for a moment, his feelings, what ensued within a minute or two
afterwards was sufficient to excite his sternest mood; for as soon as
ever the head of his procession became visible to the crowd on the
green, there arose a tremendous storm of yelling, hooting, hissing, and
groaning: and when Mr. Delamere made his appearance in front of the
hustings, you might have imagined that you were witnessing the reception
given to some loathsome miscreant mounting the gallows to expiate with
his life a hideous and revolting crime. He advanced, nevertheless, with
a smile of cheerful resolution and good-humor, though he changed color a
little; and, taking off his hat, bowed in all directions. Gracious
Heaven! what a contrast he presented to his popular rival, Mr. Titmouse,
who stood grinning and winking to the wretches immediately underneath,
evidently with a spiteful gratification at the treatment which his
opponent was experiencing. Any one on the hustings or in the crowd had
but to call out "Three cheers for Mr. Titmouse!" to be instantly obeyed;
then "Three _groans_ for the young boroughmonger!" were responded to
with amazing vehemence and effect. Viewed from a distance sufficient to
prevent your observing the furious faces of the dense mob, and hearing
the opprobrious epithets which were levelled against the unpopular
candidate, the scene appeared both interesting and exciting. On the
outskirts of the crowd were to be seen a great number of carriages, both
close and open, principally occupied by ladies--and I need hardly say
who was the favorite in _those_ quarters. Then the rival bands moved
continually about, playing well-known national airs; while the banners
and flags, blue and yellow, heightened the exhilarating and picturesque
effect of the whole. The hustings were strong and commodious; Mr.
Titmouse and his friends stood on the right, Mr. Delamere and his
friends on the left side. He was dressed in a simple dark blue surtout
and plain black stock. He was tall, elegant, and easy in his person,
appearance, and gestures; his countenance was prepossessing, and bespoke
a little excitement, which did not, however, obscure its good-nature.
And beside him stood his mover and seconder, Mr. Gold and Mr.
Milnthorpe: the two late members; and about twenty or thirty other
gentlemen--the whole party forming such a strong contrast to their
opponents, as must have challenged any one's observation in an instant.
Titmouse stood in the centre, leaning (as he supposed) gracefully,
against the front bar; on his right stood the burly, slovenly figure of
Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire, with his big, bloated, blotchy face: on
Mr. Titmouse's left stood his proposer, the "Reverend" Smirk Mudflint.
His lean, sallow face wore a very disagreeable and bitter expression,
which was aggravated by a sinister cast of one of his eyes. He was
dressed in black, with a white neckerchief and no shirt-collar. Next to
him stood Going Gone, Esq., Mr. Titmouse's seconder, with a ruddy
complexion, light hair, a droll eye, and an expression of coarse but by
no means ill-natured energy. Gammon stood immediately behind Titmouse,
into whose ear he whispered frequently and anxiously. There were also
the Reverend Gideon Fleshpot, (though he evidently did not wish to make
himself conspicuous,) Mr. Glister, Mr. Grogram, Mr. Woodlouse, Mr.
Centipede, Mr. Ginblossom, Mr. Hic Hæc Hoc, the Messrs. Bloodsuck,
father and son--and other "leading Liberals." The business of the day
having been opened, with the ordinary formalities, by the returning
officer, he earnestly besought the assembled multitude to remember that
they were Englishmen, and to give both parties fair play, allowing every
one who might address them from the hustings, to be heard without
serious interruption. It had been arranged between the two committees
that Mr. Titmouse should be first proposed; and the moment, therefore,
that the returning officer ceased speaking, the "Reverend" Mr. Mudflint
took off his hat and prepared to address the "electors;" but he had to
wait for at least three minutes, in order that the applause with which
he had been greeted might subside; during which little anxious interval,
he could not help directing towards his opponents a look of bitter
exultation. He spoke with the self-possession, fluency, and precision of
a practised public speaker. If the day's proceedings were to take their
tone from that of the opening speech, 't was a thousand pities that it
had fallen to the lot of the "Reverend" Mr. Mudflint to deliver it. He
had so clear a voice, spoke with such distinctness and deliberation, and
amid such silence, that every word he uttered was audible all over the
crowd; and anything more unchristian, uncourteous, unfair, towards his
opponents, and calculated to excite towards them the hatred of the
crowd, could hardly have been conceived. In what offensive and indecent
terms he spoke of the Established Church and its ministers! of the
aristocracy, ("those natural tyrants," he said,) and indeed of all the
best and time-hallowed institutions of dear glorious old England--which
might, by the way, well blush to own such a creature as he, as one
entitled by birth to call himself one of her sons! How he hailed the
approaching downfall of "_priest-craft_" and "_king-craft_!"--"A new
light," he said, "was diffusing itself over benighted mankind--'t was
the pure and steady light of REASON, and all filthy things were flying
from before it," (immense cheers followed the announcement of this
important and interesting fact.) "The Bible," he said, "was a book of
excellent common sense; and nothing but villanous priestcraft had
attempted to torture and dislocate it into all sorts of fantastic
mysteries, which led to rank idolatry and blasphemy, equally revolting
to God and man." (Perceiving, from the coolness with which it was
received, that this was going a _little_ too rapidly a-head, he dropped
that subject altogether, and soon regained the ear of his audience, by
descanting in very declamatory and inflammatory terms upon the
resplendent victory which the people had recently gained in the glorious
Bill for giving Everybody Everything.) "They had burst their bonds with
a noble effort; but their chains would be quickly re-riveted, unless
they followed up their advantage, and never stopped short of crushing a
heartless, tyrannical, and insolent oligarchy; unless the people were
now true to themselves, and returned to the House of Commons men
resolved to watch over the energies of reviving liberty, lest they
should be strangled in their way--(the remainder of the sentence was
inaudible in the storm of applause which it excited.) Under these
circumstances, Providence itself had pointed out an individual whom he
was proud and happy to propose to their notice--(here he turned and
bowed to Mr. Titmouse, who, plucking off his hat, bobbed in return, amid
the deafening cheers of all before them, to whom also he bowed
repeatedly.) A gentleman who seemed, as it were, made for them; who, in
his own person, might be said to afford a lively illustration of the
regeneration of society--who, to borrow for a moment an absurd word
from his opponents, had by a sort of _miracle_ (with what an infernal
emphasis he pronounced this word!) been placed where he was, in his
present proud position; who had totally and happily changed the whole
aspect of affairs in the neighborhood, which had already become the
scene of his profuse and yet discriminating generosity and hospitality;
who stood in bright and bold relief from out a long gloomy line of
ancestors, all of whom, he lamented to say, had lived and died in enmity
to the people, and had distinguished themselves by nothing except their
bigotry, and hatred of civil and religious liberty. Mr. Titmouse was the
first of his ancient family to claim the proud title of the--Man of the
People. (Here a voice called out, 'three cheers for Mr.
Titmouse!'--which were given spontaneously, and most effectively.) His
'_Address_' was worthy of him--it did equal honor to his head and his
heart, (it is impossible to describe the smile which here just glanced
over the countenance of Mr. Gammon,) touching nothing that it did not
adorn--at once bold, explicit, comprehensive, and uncompromising!--He
had had the felicity of enjoying the acquaintance, he might venture
perhaps to say, the friendship, of Mr. Titmouse, since he had taken up
his abode at the home of his ancestors, and very proud was he--Mr.
Mudflint--to be able to say so. He could assure the electors, from his
own personal knowledge of Mr. Titmouse, that they would have cause to be
proud of their future representative--of the choice which they were
about to make. (Here the worthy speaker had some sudden misgivings as to
the display likely to be made by Titmouse, when it came to his turn to
address the electors:--so he added in _rather_ a subdued tone)--It was
true that they might not have, in Mr. Titmouse, a magpie in the House,
(_laughter_,) a mere chatterer--much cry and little wool; they had had
enough of mere speechifiers at St. Stephen's--but they would have a good
working member, (_cheers;_) one always at his post in the hour of
danger, (_cheers;_) a good committee-man, and one whose princely fortune
rendered him independent of party and of the blandishments of power. In
the language of the ancient _poet_ (_!_) Mr. Mudflint would exclaim on
such an occasion; '_Facta, non verba quæro_,' (_great cheering._) And
now a word for his opponent, (_groans._) He was a mere puppet, held in
the hands of some one out of sight, (_laughter,_)--it _might_ be of a
base old boroughmonger, (_groans_)--who sought to make Yatton a rotton
borough, (_hisses,_) a stepping-stone to ascendency in the county,
(Cries of 'Will he though, lad, eh?') who would buy and sell them like
slaves, (_hisses,_) and would never rest satisfied till he had restored
the intolerable old vassalage of feudalism, (groans and hisses here
burst forth from that enlightened assemblage, at the bare idea of
anything so frightful.) He meant nothing personally offensive to the
honorable candidate--but _was_ he worthy of a moment's serious notice?
(_great laughter._) Had he an opinion of his own? (_loud laughter._) Had
he not better, to use the language of a book that was much
misunderstood, _tarry at Jerusalem_ (_!!!_) _till his beard was grown_?
Was he not, in fact, a nonentity unworthy of a reasonable man's
attention? Was he not reeking from Oxford, (_groans,_) that hotbed of
pedantic ignorance and venerable bigotry, (_hootings,_) surrounded by a
dismal and lurid halo of superstition?" (_groaning and hooting._)

Finer and finer was Mr. Mudflint becoming every moment as he warmed with
his subject--but unfortunately his audience was beginning very
unequivocally to intimate that they were quite satisfied with what they
had already heard. A cry, for instance, issued from the crowd--"the rest
of my _discoorse_ next Sunday!"--for they knew that they were being
kept all this while from one of their greatest favorites, Mr. Going
Gone, who had also himself been latterly rather frequently and
significantly winking his eye at those before him, and shrugging his
shoulders. Mr. Mudflint, therefore, with feelings of vivid vexation,
pique, and envy, concluded rather abruptly by proposing TITTLEBAT
TITMOUSE, ESQUIRE, of YATTON, as a fit and proper person to represent
them in Parliament. Up went hats into the air, and shouts of the most
joyous and enthusiastic description rent the air for several minutes.
Then took off his hat the jolly Mr. Going Gone--a signal for roars of
laughter, and cries of coarse and droll welcome, in expectancy of fun.
Nor were they disappointed. He kept them in good-humor and fits of
laughter during the whole of his "Address;" and though destitute of any
pretence to refinement, I must at the same time say, that there were to
be detected in it no traces of ill-nature. He concluded by seconding the
nomination of Mr. Titmouse, amid tumultuous cheers; and after waiting
for some few minutes, in order that they might subside, Mr. Gold took
off his hat, and essayed to address the crowd. Now he really was, what
he looked, an old man of unaffected and very great good-humor, and a
benevolence which was extensive, and systematic. He had only the week
before distributed soup, blankets, coals, and potatoes to two hundred
poor families in the borough, even as he had done at that period of the
year, for the preceding quarter of a century. No tale of distress,
indeed, was ever told him in vain, unless palpably fictitious and
fraudulent. The moment that his bare head, scantily covered with gray
hairs, was visible, there arose, at a given signal from Mr. Barnabas
Bloodsuck, a dreadful hissing, hooting, and groaning from all parts of
the crowd. If he appeared disposed to persevere in addressing the two or
three persons immediately around him, that only infuriated the mob
against the poor old man, who bore it all, however, with great
good-humor and fortitude. But it was in vain. After some twenty minutes
spent in useless efforts to make himself audible, he concluded in mere
dumb show, by proposing THE HONORABLE GEOFFREY LOVEL DELAMERE, at the
mention of whose name there again arose a perfect tempest of howling,
hissing, groaning, and hooting. Then Mr. Milnthorpe came forward,
determined not to be "_put down_." He was a very tall and powerfully
built man; bold and determined, with a prodigious power of voice, and
the heart of a lion. "Now, lads, I'm ready to try which can tire the
other out first!" he shouted in a truly stentorian voice, heard over all
their uproar, which it _redoubled_. How vain the attempt! How ridiculous
the challenge! Confident of his lungs, he smiled good-humoredly at the
hissing and bellowing mass before him, and for nearly half an hour
persevered in his attempts to make himself heard. At length, however,
without his having in the slightest degree succeeded, his pertinacity
began to irritate the crowd who, in fact, felt themselves being
_bullied_; and _that_ no crowd, that ever I saw, or heard of, can bear
for one instant; and _what is one against so many_? Hundreds of fists
were held up and shaken at him. A missile of some sort or another was
flung at him, though it missed him; and then the returning officer
advised him to desist from his attempts, lest mischief should ensue; on
which he shouted at the top of his voice, "I second Mr. Delamere!" and,
amid immense groaning and hissing, replaced his hat on his head, thereby
owning himself vanquished; which the mob also perceiving, they burst
into loud and long-continued laughter.

"Now, Mr. Titmouse!" said the returning officer, addressing that
gentleman: who on hearing the words, turned as white as a sheet, and
felt very much disposed to be sick. He pulled out of his coat-pocket a
well-worn little roll of paper, on which was the speech which Mr.
Gammon had prepared for him, as I have already intimated; and with a
shaking hand he unrolled it, casting at its contents a glance--momentary
and despairing. What then would that little fool have given for memory,
voice, and manner enough to "speak the speech that had been set down for
him!" He cast a dismal look over his shoulder at Mr. Gammon, and took
off his hat--Sir Harkaway clapping him on the back, exclaiming, "Now
for't, lad--have at 'em, and away--never fear!" The moment that he stood
bareheaded, and prepared to address the writhing mass of faces before
him, he was greeted with a prodigious shout, while hats were some of
them waved, and others flung into the air. It was, indeed, several
minutes before the uproar abated in the least. With fearful rapidity,
however, every species of noise and interruption ceased--and a deadly
silence prevailed. The sea of eager excited faces--all turned towards
_him_--was a spectacle which might for a moment have shaken the nerves
of even a _man_--had he been "unaccustomed to public speaking." The
speech, which--brief and simple though it was--he had never been able to
make his own, even after copying it out half-a-dozen times, and trying
to learn it off for an hour or two daily during the preceding fortnight,
he had now utterly forgotten; and he would have given a hundred pounds
to retire at once from the contest, or sink unperceived under the floor
of the hustings.

"Begin! begin!" whispered Gammon, earnestly.

"Ya--a--s--but--what shall I say?" stammered Titmouse.

"Your speech"--answered Gammon, impatiently.

"I--I--'pon my--soul--I've--forgot every word of it!"

"Then _read_ it," said Gammon, in a furious whisper--

"Good God, you'll be hissed off the hustings!--Read from the paper, do
you hear!" he added, almost gnashing his teeth.

Matters having come to this fearful issue, "Gentlemen," commenced Mr.
Titmouse, faintly----

"Hear him! Hear, hear!--Hush!--Sh! sh!" cried the impatient and
expectant crowd.

Now, I happen to have a short-hand writer's notes of every word uttered
by Mr. Titmouse, together with an account of the reception it met with:
and I shall here give the reader, first, Mr. Titmouse's _real_, and
secondly, Mr. Titmouse's _supposed_ speech, as it appeared two days
afterwards in the columns of the _Yorkshire Stingo_.

    "Look on _this_ picture----and on THIS!"

    Mr. Titmouse's ACTUAL Speech.

    "GENTLEMEN,--Most uncommon, unaccustomed as I am,
    (_cheers_)--happy--memorable,--proudest--high honor--unworthy,
    (_cheering_)--day of my life--important crisis, (_cheers_)--day gone
    by, and arrived--too late, (_cheering_)--civil and religions liberty
    all over the world, (_immense cheering, led off by Mr. Mudflint._)
    Yes, gentlemen,--I would observe--it is unnecessary to say--passing
    of that truly glorious Bill--charter--no mistake--Britons never
    shall be slaves, (_enthusiastic cheers._)--Gentlemen, would be ruin
    to go back, while to stand still was impossible, (_cheers;_) and,
    therefore, there was nothing for it but to go forward, (_great
    cheering_). He looked upon the passing of the Bill for giving
    Everybody Everything, as establishing an entirely new order of
    things, (_cheers._) in which the people had been roused to a sense
    of their being the only legitimate source of power, (_cheering._)
    They had, like Samson, though weakened by the cruelty and torture of
    his tyrants, bowed down and broken into pieces the gloomy fabric of
    aristocracy. The words 'Civil and Religious Liberty' were now no
    longer a by-word and a reproach, (_cheers;_) but, as had been finely
    observed by the gentleman who had so eloquently proposed him to
    their notice, the glorious truth had gone forth to the ends of the
    earth, that no man was under any responsibility for his opinions or
    his belief, any more than for the shape of his nose, (_universal
    cheering._) A spirit of tolerance, amelioration, and renovation, was
    now abroad, actively engaged in repairing our defective and
    dilapidated constitution, the relic of a barbarous age--with some
    traces of modern duty, but more of Church Establishment to
    a--difference between me and my honorable opponent, (_loud cheers
    and groans,_) I live among you, (_cheers_)--spend my money in the
    borough, (_cheers_)--no business to come here, ('_No, no!_')--right
    about, close borough, (_hisses!_)--patient attention, which I will
    not further trespass upon, (_'hear! hear!' and loud
    cheering,_)--full explanation--rush early to the--base, bloody, and
    brutal (_cheers_)--poll triumphant--extinguish forever,
    (_cheers._)--Gentlemen, these are my sentiments--wish, you many
    happy--re--hem! a-hem--and by early displaying a determination
    to--(_cries of 'we will! we will!'_)--eyes of the whole country upon
    you--crisis of our national representation--patient
    attention--latest day of my life.--Gentlemen, yours truly."

    Mr. Titmouse's REPORTED Speech.

    "Silence having been restored, Mr. Titmouse said, that he feared it
    was but too evident that he was unaccustomed to scenes so exciting
    as the present one--that was one source of his embarrassment; but
    the greatest was, the enthusiastic reception with which he had been
    honored, and of which he owned himself quite unworthy, (_cheers._)
    He agreed with the gentleman who had proposed him in so very able
    and powerful a speech, (_cheers,_) that we had arrived at a crisis
    in our national history, (_cheering_)--a point at which it
    unaccustomed as I am to address an assembly of this--ahem! (_'hear!
    hear! hear!' and cheers_)--civil and religious liberty all over the
    world, (_cheers_)--yet the tongue can feel where the heart cannot
    express the (_cheers_)--so help me----! universal suffrage and cheap
    and enlightened equality, (_cries of 'that's it, lad!'_)--which can
    never fear to see established in this country--(_cheers_)--if only
    true to--industrious classes and corn-laws--yes, gentlemen, I say
    corn-laws--for I am of op--(_hush! cries of 'ay, lad, what dost say
    about_ THEM?') working out the principles which conduce to the
    establishment a--a--a--civil and religious liberty of the press!
    (_cheers!_) and the working classes, (_hush!_)--Gentlemen,
    unaccustomed as I am--well--at any rate--will you--I say--_will_
    you? (_vehement cries of 'No! No! Never!'_) unless you are true to
    yourselves! Gentlemen, without going into--vote by Ballot (_cheers_)
    and quarterly Parliaments, (_loud cheering,_) three polar stars of
    my public conduct--(here the great central banner was waved to and
    fro, amid enthusiastic cheering)--and reducing the over-grown
    ancient ignorance and unsightliness, (_cheers._) The great Bill he
    alluded to, had roused the masses into political being, (_immense
    cheering,_) and made them sensible of the necessity of keeping down
    a rapacious and domineering oligarchy, (_groans._) Was not the
    liberty of the press placed now upon an intelligible and
    imperishable basis?--Already were its purifying and invigorating
    influences perceptible, (_cheering_)--and he trusted that it would
    never cease to direct its powerful energies to the demolition of the
    many remaining barriers to the improvement of mankind, (_cheers._)
    The corn-laws must be repealed, the taxes must be lowered, the army
    and navy reduced; vote by ballot and universal suffrage conceded,
    the quarterly meeting of Parliament secured, and the revenues of the
    church be made applicable to civil purposes. Marriage must be no
    longer fenced about by religious ceremonials, (_cheers._) He found
    that there were three words on his banner, which were worth a
    thousand speeches--_Peace, Retrenchment, Reform_.--which, as had
    been happily observed by the gentleman who had so ably proposed
    him"----

[And so on for a column more; in the course of which there were really
so many flattering allusions to the opening speech of the proposer of
Titmouse, that it has often occurred to me as probable, that the
"Reverend" Mr. Mudflint had supplied the above report of Mr. Titmouse's
speech.]




CHAPTER II.


Mr. Titmouse, on concluding, made a great number of very profound bows,
and replaced his hat upon his head, amid prolonged and enthusiastic
cheering, which, on Mr. Delamere's essaying to address the crowd, was
suddenly converted into a perfect hurricane of hissing; like as we now
and then find a shower of rain suddenly change into hail. Mr. Delamere
stood the pitiless pelting of the storm with calmness, resolution, and
good-humor. Ten minutes had elapsed, and he had not been allowed to
utter one syllable audible to any one beyond four or five feet from him.
Every fresh effort he made to speak caused a renewal of the uproar, and
many very offensive and opprobrious epithets were applied to him. Surely
this was disgraceful, disgusting! What had he done to deserve such
treatment? Had he been guilty of offering some gross indignity and
outrage to every person present, individually, could he have fared worse
than he did? He had conducted his canvass with scrupulous and exemplary
honor and integrity--with the utmost courtesy to all parties, whether
adverse or favorable. He was surely not deficient in those qualities of
head and of heart--of personal appearance, even, which usually secure
man favor with his fellows. _Who_ could lay _anything_ to his
charge--except that he had ventured to solicit the suffrages of the
electors of Yatton, in competition with Mr. Titmouse? If men of a
determined character and of princely means have to calculate upon such
brutal usage as this, can those who sanction or perpetrate it wonder at
bribery and other undue means being resorted to, in absolute
self-defence? Is it meant to deter any one from coming forward that has
not a forehead of brass, leathern lungs, and heart of marble? After
upwards of a quarter of an hour had been thus consumed, without Mr.
Delamere's having been permitted to utter two consecutive sentences,
though he stood up against it patiently and gallantly, the returning
officer, who had often appealed to them in vain, earnestly besought Mr.
Titmouse to use his influence with the crowd, in order to secure Mr.
Delamere a moment's hearing.

"'Pon my life--I--eh?" quoth Titmouse. "A likely thing! He'd do it for
_me_, wouldn't he? Every man for himself--all fair at an election, eh,
Gammon?"

"Do it, sir!" whispered Gammon, indignantly--"do it, and instantly--or
you deserve to be kicked off the hustings!" Titmouse, on this,
took off his hat with a very bad grace, and addressing the crowd,
said--"I--I--suppose you'll hear what he's got to say for
himself, gents"----But all was in vain; "Off! off! No!--Go
home!--ah!--ah!--a--a--a--h!----St!--St!--Get away home with you, you
young boroughmonger!--a--a--h!" came in louder and fiercer tones from
the mob. Yet Mr. Delamere did not like to give up without another and a
desperate effort to catch the ear of the mob; but while he was in the
act of raising his right hand, and exclaiming--"Gentlemen, only a word
or two--I pledge my honor that I will not keep you three minutes"--some
miscreant from the body of the crowd aimed at him a stone, not a very
large one to be sure, yet flung with very considerable force, and
hitting him just about the centre of the upper lip, which it cut open.
He instantly turned pale, and applied to the wound his white
pocket-handkerchief, which was speedily saturated with blood. Still the
gallant young fellow stood his ground with firmness, and the smile
which he endeavored to assume, it was enough to have brought tears into
one's eyes to witness. The instant that Gammon had seen the stone take
effect, he rushed over towards where Mr. Delamere stood amid his
agitated friends, who were dissuading him from persevering in his
attempt to address the crowd?--

"You are severely hurt, sir!" exclaimed Gammon, with much agitation,
taking off his hat with an air of earnest and respectful sympathy. Then
he turned with an air of excitement towards the mob, who seemed shocked
into silence by the incident which had taken place, and were uttering
increasing cries of "Shame! shame!"

"Shame?--shame, _shame_, indeed, gentlemen"--he exclaimed
vehemently--"Where is that atrocious miscreant? In the name of Mr.
Titmouse, who is too much agitated to address you himself, I conjure you
to secure that abominable ruffian, and let him be brought to justice! If
not, Mr. Titmouse protests solemnly that he will withdraw from the
election."

"Bravo, Titmouse! bravo! Spoke like a man!" exclaimed several voices. A
desperate struggle was soon perceived about that quarter where the man
who flung the stone must have been standing; he had been seized, and
being in a trice most severely handled, a couple of men almost throttled
him with the tightness of their grasp round his neck--these too the very
men who had encouraged him to perpetrate the outrage!--and, amid a
shower of kicks and blows, he was hauled off, and deposited, half dead,
in the cage.

"Three cheers for Delamere!" cried a voice from the crowd; and never had
a more vehement shout issued from them, than in response to that
summons.

"Delamere! Delamere!--Hear him!--Speak out!--Delamere! Delamere!" cried
a great number of voices, of people growing more and more excited as
they beheld his handkerchief becoming suffused with blood. But he was
not in a condition then to respond to their call. He was suffering
really not a little pain; and, moreover, his feelings had for a
moment--just for a moment--given way, when he adverted to the
possibility that Lady De la Zouch might have witnessed the outrage, or
received exaggerated accounts of it. Mr. St. Aubyn, however, stood
forward in Mr. Delamere's stead--and in a very touching and judicious
but brief address, roused the feelings of the crowd to a high pitch of
sympathy for Mr. Delamere, who stood beside him, hat in
hand--vehemently, and at length successfully, struggling to repress his
rising emotions. If only one out of a hundred of those present had had a
vote, this stone's throw might have changed the fate of the
election!--No other candidate having been proposed, the returning
officer then proceeded to call for a show of hands; on which a very
great number were held up in favor of Mr. Titmouse; but when Mr.
Delamere's name was called, it really seemed as if every one present had
extended both his hands!--there could be no mistake, no room for doubt.
Titmouse turned as pale as a sheet, and gazed with an expression of
ludicrous consternation at Gammon, who also looked, in common indeed
with his whole party, not a little disconcerted. The returning officer,
having procured silence, declared that the choice of the electors had
fallen upon Mr. Delamere; on which a tremendous cheering followed, which
lasted for several minutes; and, luckily recollecting the utter nullity
of a show of hands as a test or evidence, either way, of the result of
the election,[1] Mr. Gammon directed Mudflint formally to demand a poll
on behalf of Mr. Titmouse; on which the returning officer announced that
the poll would take place at eight o'clock the next morning; and
thereupon the day's proceedings closed. Mr. Delamere, in a very few
words, returned thanks to the electors for the honor which they had
conferred upon him, and entreated them to go early to the poll. He and
his friends then left the hustings. His procession quickly formed; his
band struck up with extraordinary energy and spirit--"_See the
Conquering Hero comes!_" but the rolling of the drums, the clashing of
cymbals, the rich deep tones of the bassoons, trombones, and French
horns, and clear and lively notes of flute and clarionet, were quite
overpowered by the acclamations of the crowd which attended them to his
committee-room. Sir Percival Pickering, throwing open the window,
addressed a word or two to the dense crowd; and then, having given three
lusty cheers, they withdrew. A glass of wine and water quickly refreshed
the spirits of Mr. Delamere, and a surgeon having arrived, found it
necessary to dress the wound with much care, for the cut was severe; in
fact, the upper lip was partially laid open; and he declared it highly
imprudent for Mr. Delamere to attempt to make his appearance out of
doors on the morrow. As for Mr. Crafty, as soon as he heard what had
taken place, he uttered, as he felt bound to do, a few casual
expressions of sympathy; but what passed through his mind, as he resumed
his seat before his papers, was--"What a pity that all those fellows had
not had votes, and that the poll had not commenced _instanter_!" The
truly unexpected issue of the day's proceedings, while it elevated the
spirits of all Mr. Delamere's friends, produced only one effect upon the
imperturbable Mr. Crafty; he strongly suspected that the other side
would probably be resorting during the night to measures of a desperate
and unscrupulous description, in order to counteract the unfavorable
impression calculated to be effected by the defeat of Mr. Titmouse at
the show of hands. As for that gentleman, by the way, he became very
insolent towards Gammon on reaching the committee-room, and protested,
with fury in his face, that it had all been brought about by Mr.
Gammon's "cursed officious meddling with Mr. Titmouse's name before the
mob after the stone had been thrown;" on hearing which, "Go on to the
Hall, sir, dine, and get drunk if you choose," said Gammon, bitterly and
peremptorily; "I shall remain here all night. Powerful as are your
energies, they require relaxation after the fatigues of the day!" and
with a very _decisive_, but not violent degree of force, Titmouse was
urged, in a twinkling, into the outer committee-room. Mr. Gammon had,
indeed, as much serious work before him that night as Mr. Crafty, and
prepared for secret and decisive action every whit as calmly and
effectively as he. Mr. Crafty's arrangements were admirable. During the
day he had parcelled out the borough into a number of small departments,
each of which he committed to some steady and resolute friend of Mr.
Delamere, who was to look after every elector in his division about whom
there was any ground for fear, in respect either of apprehended
abduction, or of treachery. These gentlemen were to be relieved at
intervals; and from one to the other of them, perpetually, were the
personal agents of Crafty to go their rounds, in order to see that all
was right, and carry intelligence to headquarters. Then others were
intrusted with the ticklish and tiresome duty of watching the movements
of the enemy in quarters where Crafty had sure information of intended
operations during the night. Complete arrangements had been made, also,
for bringing up voters to the poll at the exact times, and in the
numbers, and in the manner, which might on the morrow be determined on
by Mr. Crafty. Names were noted down of those to whom the bribery oath
was to be administered. Prudent as were these precautions, they did not
entirely prevent the mischief against which they had been levelled. As
the night wore on, evidence was, from time to time, brought in to Mr.
Crafty that the enemy were at work at, their expected tricks; _e.g._--

    "Jacob Joliffe is missing. Wife _says_ she knows nothing about him.
    _Inquire._"

    "Send _at least a couple_ of men to watch Peter Jiggins, or he'll
    be out of the way when he's wanted."

    "Haste--haste. G. Atkins and Adam Hutton, both safe ten minutes
    ago, are off; enticed out into a postchaise--gone towards
    York--(Half-past eleven.")

    "Send some one to the Jolly Snobs to watch the treating going on.
    _Most important._ Mr. Titmouse has been there, and drunk a glass of
    rum with them."

Then more mysterious missives made their appearance from Mr. Crafty's
own familiars.

    "Q.C.S.H.O.--12."--(_i.e._ "The Quaint Club still holds
    out.--Twelve o'clock.")

    "Q.C.G._W._--1/2 past 1."--(_i.e._ "The Quaint Club are _going
    wrong_.--Half-past one o'clock.")

    "S.B.; G.O. => => + => => H. 1/4 to 2."--(_i.e._ "I have seen Bran.
    Gammon offers ten pounds, in addition to the ten pounds already
    given.--They hesitate.--A quarter to two o'clock.")

    "3/heard & S. B. & M. w. B. O. Q. C.--12--3."--(_i.e._ "Three of
    our people have just overheard _and seen_ Bloodsuck and Mudflint,
    with Bran, offering the Quaint Club _twelve_ pounds.--Three
    o'clock.")

    "Q. C. G. R. w. Y. & C. T. T. Y. M.S. I.--4."--(_i.e._ "The Quaint
    Club are getting restive with _you_, and coming to terms with
    Titmouse. You must stir instantly.--Four o'clock.")

    "[Greek: Delta Delta] => 10 m. 4."--These last mysterious symbols
    caused Mr. Crafty instantly to bestir himself, He changed color a
    _little_, and went into the adjoining room. The meaning of the
    communication was--"_Great danger to both parties_."

In the adjoining room, where two candles were burning down in their very
sockets, and the fire nearly out, were some four or five trusty friends
of Mr. Delamere--gentlemen who had placed themselves entirely at Mr.
Crafty's disposal throughout the night. When he entered, they were all
nearly asleep, or at least dozing. Beckoning two of them into his own
room, he instructed one to go and plant himself openly--nay, as
conspicuously as possible--near the door of Mr. Titmouse's
committee-room, so as not to fail of being recognized, by any one
leaving or entering it, as a well-known friend of Mr. Delamere's; in
fact, Mr. Titmouse's friends were to discover that their motions were
watched. The other he instructed to act similarly opposite the door of a
small house in a narrow court--the residence, in fact, of Ben Bran,
where all the night's negotiations with the Quaint Club had been carried
on. Immediately afterwards, Mr. Crafty felt it his duty, as between man
and man, to warn his opponent of the mortal peril in which he was
placed; and, in his anxiety for fair play, found means to convey the
following note into the committee-room where Mr. Gammon and one or two
others were sitting:--

  "Take care!! You are deceived! betrayed! Q. C. is sold
  out and out to the _Blues_!! And part of the bargain, that B. B.
  shall betray you into bribery in the presence of witnesses--_not
  one man_ of the club safe; this have _just learned_ from the wife of
  one of them. From a well-wishing friend, but _obligated_ to vote
  (against his conscience) for the Blues.

  "P.S.--Lord D. in the town (quite private) with lots of _the
  needful_, and doing business sharply."

While Mr. Gammon and his companions were canvassing this letter, in came
the two gentlemen who had been watched, in the way I have stated, from
Ben Bran's house to Mr. Titmouse's committee-room, pale and agitated,
with intelligence of that fact. Though hereat Gammon's color deserted
his cheek, he affected to treat the matter very lightly, and laughed at
the idea of being deluded by such boy's play. If Lord De la Zouch--said
he--had hired Crafty only to play tricks like _these_, he might as well
have saved the trouble and expense. Here a slight bustle was heard at
the door; and the hostler made his appearance, saying that a man had
just given him a document which he produced to Mr. Gammon; who, taking
from the hostler a dirty and ill-folded paper, read as follows:--

  "To Squire Titmous. you Are All Wrong. the Blues is _wide_
  Awake All Night and nos all, Lord Dillysoush about with One
  hundred Spies; And look Out for traiters in the Camp. A
  friend or Enemy as you Will, but loving Fair Play."

"Poh!" exclaimed Gammon, flinging it on the table contemptuously.

Now, I may as well mention here, that about nine o'clock in the evening,
Mr. Parkinson had brought to Crafty _sure_ intelligence that a very
zealous and influential person, who was entirely in the confidence of
the enemy, had come to him a little while before, and candidly
disclosed the very melancholy position of his--the aforesaid
communicant's--financial affairs; and Mr. Parkinson happened to be in a
condition to verify the truth of the man's statement, that there was a
writ out against him for £250; and that, unless he could meet it, he
would have to quit the county before daybreak, and his very promising
prospects in business would be utterly ruined. Mr. Parkinson knew these
matters professionally; and, in short, Crafty was given to understand,
that so disgusted was Mr. M'Do'em--the gentleman in question--with Whig
principles (his inexorable creditor being a Whig) and practices, such as
the bribery, treating, and corruption at that moment going on, that--his
conscience pricked him--and--ahem!--the poor penitent was ready to make
all the amends in his power by discovering villany to its intended
victims. Crafty, having felt the ground pretty safe underneath him, took
upon himself to say, that Mr. M'Do'em need be under no further
apprehension as to his pecuniary liabilities; but, in the mean while, he
would certainly wish for a little _evidence_ of the _bona fides_ of his
present conduct.

"Come," quoth M'Do'em, after receiving a pregnant wink from Mr.
Crafty--"send some one whom you can rely upon with me _immediately_, to
do as I bid him--and let him report to you what he shall actually see."

No sooner said than done. A trusty managing clerk of Mr. Parkinson's
forthwith accompanied M'Do'em on a secret expedition....

They stood at a window with a broken pane. 'T was a small ill-furnished
kitchen, and in the corner, close to the fire, sat smoking a middle-aged
man, wearing a dirty brown paper cap. Opposite to him sat two persons,
in very earnest conversation with him. They were Mr. Mudflint and Mr.
Bloodsuck, junior.

"Come, come, _that's_ decidedly unreasonable," quoth the former.

"No, sir, it _a'n't_. I'm an independent man!--It quite cut me to the
heart, I 'sure you, sir, to see Mr. Delamere so dreadfully used--my good
missus, that's in bed, says to me--says she"----

"But what had Mr. Titmouse to do with it, you know?" said Mudflint,
taking out of his pocket a bit of crumpled paper, at which the man he
addressed gazed listlessly, shook his head, and exclaimed, "_No, it
won't do_----He didn't desarve such treatment, poor young gentleman."
(Here Bloodsuck and Mudflint whispered--and the latter, with a very bad
grace, produced a second bit of crumpled paper.)

"_That's_ something like"--said the man, rather more good-humoredly.
"Is't _sartain_ Mr. Titmouse had nothing to do with it?"

"To be sure not!--Now, mind, by a quarter past eight--eh?" inquired
Mudflint, very anxiously, and somewhat sullenly.

"I'm a man of my word--no one can say I ever broke it in earnest; and as
for a straightforward bit o' business like this, I say, I'm your man--so
here's my hand."...

"Don't _that_ look rather like business?" inquired M'Do'em, in a
whisper, after they had lightly stepped away.--"But come along!"...

After another similar scene, the two returned to the Hare and Hounds,
and the matter was satisfactorily settled between Crafty and
M'Do'em--one hundred down, and the rest on the morning after the
election. He was to _poll for Titmouse_, and that, too, early in the
day; and be as conspicuous and active as possible in his exertions in
behalf of that gentleman--to appear, in short, one of his most stanch
and confidential supporters. Whether Lord De la Zouch or his son would
have sanctioned such conduct as this, had they had an inkling of it, I
leave to the reader to conjecture: but Crafty was easy about the
matter--'t was only, in _his_ opinion, "manœuvring;" and all weapons
are fair against a burglar or highwayman; all devices against a
swindler. M'Do'em gave Crafty a list of nine voters at Grilston who had
received five pounds a-piece; and enabled him to discover a case of
wholesale _treating_, brought home to one of the leading members of Mr.
Titmouse's committee. Well, this worthy capped all his honorable
services by hurrying in to Gammon, some quarter of an hour after he had
received the second anonymous letter, and with a perfect appearance of
consternation, after carefully shutting the door and eying the window,
faltered that all was going wrong--that traitors were in the camp; that
Lord De la Zouch had _bought every man of the Quaint Club two days
before at thirty pounds a-head_! half already paid down, the rest to be
paid on the morning of the _fifteenth day after Parliament should have
met_--(M'Do'em said he did not know what that meant, but Gammon was more
influenced and alarmed by it than by anything else that had happened;)
that _Ben Bran was playing false_, having received a large sum--though
how much M'Do'em had not yet learned--as head-money from Lord De la
Zouch; and that, if one single farthing were after that moment paid or
promised to any single member of the club, either by Mr. Titmouse, or
any one on his behalf, they were all delivered, bound hand and foot,
into the power of Lord De la Zouch, and at his mercy. That so daring and
yet artful was Lord De la Zouch, that his agents had attempted to tamper
with even HIM, M'Do'em! but so as to afford him not the least hold of
them. Moreover, he knew a fellow-townsman who would, despite all his
promises to the Liberal candidate, poll for Delamere; but nothing should
induce him, M'Do'em, to disclose the name of that person, on account of
the peculiar way in which he, M'Do'em, had come to know the fact. On
hearing all this, Gammon calmly made up his mind for the worst; and
immediately resolved to close all further negotiations with the Quaint
Club. To have acted otherwise would have been mere madness, and courting
destruction. The more he reflected on the exorbitant demand of the
Quaint Club--and so _suddenly_ exorbitant, and enforced by such an
impudent sort of quiet pertinacity--the more he saw to corroborate--had
that occurred to him as necessary--the alarming intelligence of M'Do'em.
Mr. Gammon concealed much of his emotion; but he ground his teeth
together with the effort. Towards six o'clock, there was a room full of
the friends and agents of Titmouse; to whom Gammon, despite all that had
happened, and which was known only to four or five of those present,
gave a highly encouraging account of the day's prospects, but impressed
upon them all, with infinite energy, the necessity for caution and
activity. A great effort was to be made to head the poll from the first,
in order at once to do away with the _prestige_ of the show of hands;
"and the friends of Mr. Titmouse" (_i. e._ the ten pounds' worth of mob)
were to be in attendance round the polling-booth at seven o'clock, and
remain there the rest of the day, in order, by their presence; to
encourage and protect (!) the voters of Mr. Titmouse. This and one or
two other matters having been thus arranged, Mr. Gammon, who was
completely exhausted with his long labor, retired to a bedroom, and
directed that he should without fail be called in one hour's time. As he
threw himself on the bed, with his clothes on, and extinguished his
candle, he had at least the consolation of reflecting, that nine of the
enemy's stanchest voters were safely stowed away, (as he imagined,) and
that seven or eight of the _accessibles_, pledged to Mr. Delamere, had
promised to reconsider the matter.

If Gammon had taken the precaution of packing the front of the
polling-booth in the way I have mentioned, Mr. Crafty had not overlooked
the necessity of securing efficient protection for his voters; and
between seven and eight o'clock no fewer than between four and five
hundred stout yeomen, tenants of Lord De la Zouch and others of the
surrounding nobility and gentry, made their appearance in the town, and
insinuated themselves into the rapidly accumulating crowd: many of them,
however, remaining at large, at the command of Mr. Delamere's committee,
in order, when necessary, to secure safe access to the poll for those
who might require such assistance. It was strongly urged upon Mr. Crafty
to bring up a strong body of voters at the commencement, in order to
head the polling at the end of the first hour. "Not the least occasion
for it," said Crafty, quietly--"I don't care a straw for it: in a small
borough no end can be gained, where the voters are so few in number that
every man's vote is secured long beforehand to a dead certainty. There's
no _prestige_ to be gained or supported. No. Bring up _first_ all the
distant and most uncertain voters--the timid, the feeble, the wavering;
secure _them_ early while you have time and opportunity. Again, for the
first few hours poll languidly; it _may_ render the enemy over-easy. You
may perhaps make a sham _rush_ of about twenty or thirty between twelve
and one o'clock, to give them the idea that you are doing your very
best. Then fall off, poll a man now and then only, and see what _they_
will do, how _they_ are playing off their men. If you can hang back till
late in the day, then direct, very secretly and cautiously, the bribery
oath and the questions to be put to each of the enemy's men as they come
up; and, while you are thus picking them off, pour in your own voters
before the opposite party is aware of your game, and the hour for
closing the poll _may_ perhaps arrive while some dozen or so of their
men are unpolled. But above all, gentlemen," said Crafty, "every one to
his own work only. One thing, at a time, throughout the day; which is
quite long enough for all you have to do. Don't hang back in order to
bring up several voters at once; if you have _one_ ready, take him up
instanter, and have done with him. Don't give yourselves the least
concern about ascertaining the numbers that _have_ polled, but only
those that have _yet to be_ polled; the returns I will look after. Let
those stand behind the check-clerks, who are best acquainted with the
names, persons, and circumstances of the voters who come up, and can
detect imposture of any sort before the vote is recorded, _and the
mischief done_. The scoundrel may be thus easily _kept off_ the
poll-books, whom it may cost you a thousand pounds hereafter to attempt
to remove, in vain."

The day was bright and frosty; and long before eight o'clock the little
town was all alive with music, flags, cheering, and crowds passing to
and fro. The polling-booth was exceedingly commodious and well
constructed, with a view to the most rapid access and departure of the
voters. By eight o'clock there were more than a couple of thousand
persons collected before the booth; and--significant evidence of the
transient nature of yesterday's excitement!--the yellow colors appeared
as five to one. Just before eight o'clock, up drove Mr. Titmouse, in a
dog-cart, from which he jumped out amid the cheers of almost all
present, and skipped on to the bench behind his own check-clerk, with
the intention of remaining there all day to acknowledge the votes given
for him! But Mr. Delamere, with a just delicacy and pride, avoided
making his appearance either at or near the booth, at all events till
the voting was over. The first vote given was that of Obadiah Holt, the
gigantic landlord of the Hare and Hounds, and for Mr. Delamere; the
event being announced by a tremendous groan; but no one ventured any
personal incivility to the laughing giant that passed through them. A
loud cheer, as well as a sudden bobbing of the head on the part of
Titmouse, announced that the second vote had been recorded for him; and,
indeed, during the next twenty minutes he polled fifteen for Delamere's
eight. At _nine_ o'clock the poll stood thus--

        Titmouse       31
        Delamere       18
                       --
            Majority   13

Steadily adhering to Mr. Crafty's system, at _ten_ o'clock the poll
stood--

        Titmouse       53
        Delamere       29
                       --
            Majority   24

At _eleven_ o'clock--

        Titmouse       89
        Delamere       41
                       --
            Majority   48

At _twelve_ o'clock--

        Titmouse       94
        Delamere       60
                       --
            Majority   34

At _one_ o'clock--

        Titmouse      129
        Delamere       84
                       --
            Majority   45

At this point they remained stationary for some time; but Delamere had
polled all his _worst votes_, Titmouse almost all his _best_. The latter
had, indeed, only _seventeen_ more in reserve, independently of the
Quaint Club, and the still neutral _twenty_ accessibles; while Delamere
had yet, provided his promises stood firm, and none of his men were
hocussed or kidnapped, forty-five good men and true--and some faint
hopes, also, of the aforesaid twenty accessibles. For a quarter of an
hour not one man came up for either party; but at length two of
Delamere's leading friends came up, with faces full of anxiety, and
recorded their votes for Delamere, amid loud laughter. About half-past
one o'clock a prodigious--and I protest that it was both to Lord De la
Zouch and his son a totally unexpected--rush was made on behalf of
Delamere, consisting of _the twenty accessibles_; who in the midst of
yelling, and hissing, and violent abuse, voted, one after another, for
Delamere. Whether or not a strong pressure had been resorted to by some
zealous and powerful gentlemen in the neighborhood, but entirely
independent of Mr. Delamere, I know not; but the fact was as I have
stated. At _two_ o'clock the poll stood thus--

        Titmouse      145
        Delamere      134
                      ---
            Majority   11

Thus Titmouse had then polled within one of his positive reserve, and
yet was only eleven above Delamere, who had still _fifteen_ men to come
up!

"Where is the Quaint Club?" began to be more and more frequently and
earnestly asked among the crowd: but no one could give a satisfactory
answer; and more than one conjecture was hazarded, as to the possibility
of their coming up under _blue_ colors. But--_where were they_? Were
they watching the state of the poll, and under marching orders for the
moment when the enemy should be at his extremity? 'T was indeed a matter
of exquisite anxiety!--Between two o'clock and a quarter past, not one
voter was polled on either side; and the crowd, wearied with their long
labors of hissing and shouting, looked dispirited, listless, and
exhausted. By-and-by Mr. Gammon, and Messrs. Bloodsuck, (senior and
junior,) Mudflint, Woodlouse, Centipede, Ginblossom, Going Gone, Hic Hæc
Hoc, and others, made their appearance in the booth, around Titmouse.
They all looked sour, depressed, and fatigued. Their faces were indeed
enough to sadden and silence the crowd. Were Mr. Titmouse's forces
exhausted?--"Where's the Quaint Club?" roared out a man in the crowd,
addressing Mr. Gammon, who smiled wretchedly in silence. The reason of
his then appearing at the polling-booth was certainly to ascertain the
fate of the Quaint Club; but he had also another; for he had received
information that within a short time Dr. Tatham, and also fourteen of
the Yatton tenantry, were coming up to the poll. Mr. Gammon,
accordingly, had not stood there more than five minutes, before a sudden
hissing and groaning announced the approach of a Blue--in fact, it
proved to be little Dr. Tatham, who had been prevented from earlier
coming up, through attendance on one or two sick parishioners, in
different parts of the neighborhood, to whom he had been summoned
unexpectedly. It cost the quiet stout-hearted old man no little effort,
and occasioned him a little discomposure, elbowed, and jolted, and
insulted as he was; but at length there he stood before the
poll-clerks--who did not require to ask him his name or residence.
Gammon gazed at him with folded arms, and a stern and sad countenance.
Presently, inclining slightly towards Mudflint, he seemed to whisper in
that gentleman's ear; and--"Administer the bribery oath," said the
latter to the returning officer, eagerly.

"Sir," exclaimed that functionary, in a low tone, with amazement--"the
bribery oath--! To Dr. Tatham? Are you in earnest?"

"Do your duty, sir!" replied Mudflint, in a bitter, insulting tone.

"I regret to inform you, sir, that I am required to administer the
bribery oath to you," said the returning officer to Dr. Tatham, bowing
very low.

"What? What? The bribery oath? To _me_?" inquired Dr. Tatham, giving a
sudden start, and flushing violently: at which stringent evidence of his
guilt--

"Aha!" cried those of the crowd nearest to him--"Come, old gentleman!
Thou mun bolt it now!"

"Is it pretended to be believed," faltered Dr. Tatham, with visible
emotion--"that _I am bribed_?" But at that moment his eye happened to
light upon the exulting countenance of "the Reverend" Mr. Mudflint. It
calmed him. Removing his hat, he took the Testament into his hand, while
the crowd ceased hooting for a moment, in order to hear the oath read;
and with dignity he endured the indignity. He then recorded his vote for
Mr. Delamere; and after fixing a sorrowful and surprised eye on Mr.
Gammon, who stood with his hat slouched a good deal over his face, and
looking in another direction, withdrew; and as he turned his mild and
venerable face towards the crowd, the hissing subsided. Shortly
afterwards made their appearance amid great uproar, several of the
tenantry of Mr. Titmouse--all of them looking as if they had come up,
poor souls! rather to receive punishment for a crime, than to exercise
their elective franchise in a free country!--Gammon colored a little;
took out his pocket-book and pencil; and fixing on the first of the
tenantry, Mark Hackett, the eye, as it were, of a suddenly revived
serpent, wrote down his name in silence--but what an expression was on
his face! Thus he acted towards every one of those unhappy and doomed
persons; replacing his pocket-book whence he had taken it, as soon as
the last of the little body had polled. It was now a quarter to three
o'clock, (the poll closing finally at _four_,) and thus stood the
numbers:--

        Delamere         149
        Titmouse         146
                         ---
            Majority       3

On these figures being exhibited by an eager member of Mr. Delamere's
committee, there arose a tremendous uproar among the crowd, and cries of
"Tear it down! Tear it down! Ah! Bribery and corruption! Three groans
for Delamere! O--h! o----h! o----h!" Matters seemed, indeed, getting
desperate with the crowd; yet they seemed to feel a sort of comfort in
gazing at the stern, determined, but chagrined countenance of the ruling
spirit of the day, Mr. Gammon. He was a "deep hand,"--thought they--he
knew his game; and, depend upon it, he was only waiting till the enemy
was clean done, and then he would pour in the Quaint Club and crush them
forever. Thus thought hundreds before the hustings. Not a vote was
offered for a quarter of an hour; and the poll-clerks, with their pens
behind their ears, employed the interval in munching sandwiches, and
drinking sherry out of a black bottle--the onlookers cutting many jokes
upon them while thus pleasantly engaged. Symptoms were soon visible, in
the increasing proportion of blue rosettes becoming visible in and about
the crowd, that this promising state of things was reviving the hopes of
Mr. Delamere's party, while it as plainly depressed those in the yellow
interest. Not for one moment, during the whole of that close and
exciting contest, had Mr. Crafty quitted his little inner apartment,
where he had planned the battle, and conducted it to its present point
of success. Nor had his phlegmatic temperament suffered the least
excitement or disturbance: cold as ice though his heart might be, his
head was ever clear as crystal. Certainly his strategy had been
admirable. Vigilant, circumspect, equal to every emergency, he had
brought up his forces in perfect order throughout the day; the enemy had
not caught the least inkling of his real game. By his incessant,
ingenious, and _safe_ manœuvring, he had kept that dreaded body, the
Quaint Club, in play up to this advanced period of the day--in a state
of exquisite embarrassment and irresolution, balancing between hopes and
fears; and he had, moreover, rendered a temporary reverse on the field
upon which he then fought, of little real importance, by reason of the
measures he had taken to cut off the enemy entirely in their very next
move. He was now left entirely alone in his little room, standing
quietly before the fire with his hands behind him, with real composure,
feeling that he had done his duty, and awaiting the issue patiently. The
hustings, all this while, exhibited an exciting spectacle. Nearly
another quarter of an hour had elapsed, without a single vote being
added to the poll. The crowd was very great, and evidently sharing no
little of the agitation and suspense experienced by those within the
booth--(except Mr. Titmouse, whose frequent potations of brandy and
water during the day had composed him at length to sleep; and he
leaned--absolutely snoring!--against the corner of the booth, out of
sight of the crowd). The poll-clerks were laughing and talking
unconcernedly together. The leading Blues mustered strongly on their
part of the booth; elated undoubtedly, but with the feelings of men who
have desperately fought their way, inch by inch, sword to sword, bayonet
to bayonet, up to a point where they expect, nevertheless, momentarily
to be blown into the air. What _could_ have become of the Quaint Club?
thought _they_ also, with inward astonishment and apprehension. Gammon
continued standing, motionless and silent, with folded arms--his dark
surtout buttoned carelessly at the top, and his hat slouched over his
eyes, as if he sought to conceal their restlessness and agitation.
Excitement, intense anxiety, and physical exhaustion, were visible in
his countenance. He seemed indisposed to speak, even in answer to any
one who addressed him.

"O cursed Quaint Club!"--said he to himself--"O cursed Crafty! I am
beaten--beaten hollow--ridiculously! How the miscreants have bubbled me!
Crafty can now do without them, and won't endanger the election by
polling them! We are ruined! And what will be said at headquarters,
after what I have led them to believe--bah!" He almost stamped with the
vehemence of his emotions. "There's certainly yet a resource; nay, but
that also is too late--_a riot_--a nod, a breath of mine--those fine
fellows there--would _down_ with hustings, and all the poll-books be
destroyed!--No, no; it is not to be thought of--the time's gone by."

It was now nearly a quarter past three o'clock. "It's passing strange!"
thought Gammon, as he looked at his watch; "what can be in the wind? Not
a single man of them been up for either party! Perhaps, after all, Lord
De la Zouch may not have come up to their mark, and may now be merely
standing on the chance of _our_ being unable to come to terms with them.
But what can I do, without certain destruction, after what I have heard?
It will be simply jumping down into the pit."--A thought suddenly struck
him; and with forced calmness he slipped away from the polling-booth,
and, with an affectation of indifference, made his way to a house where
a trusty emissary awaited his orders. 'T was a Grilston man, a Yellow
voter, as much at Gammon's beck and call as Ben Bran was represented to
be at the command of Lord De la Zouch. Gammon despatched him on the
following enterprise--viz. to rush alarmedly among the club, who knew
_him_, but _not_ his _devotion to Gammon_--to tell them that he had just
discovered, by mere accident, the frightful danger in which they were
placed, owing to Mr. Gammon's being enraged against them on account of
their last proposal--that he had now made up his mind to the loss of the
election, and also to commence prosecutions for bribery against every
single member of the club; for that, having early suspected foul play,
he was in a position "to _nail_ every man of them," without fixing
himself on Mr. Titmouse. If he succeeded thus far--viz. in alarming
them--then, after apparently dire perplexity, he was suddenly to suggest
one mode of at once securing themselves, and foiling their bitter enemy,
Mr. Gammon; viz. hastening up to the polling-booth, without a word to
any one, and, by placing Titmouse at the top of the poll, _destroy
Gammon's motive for commencing his vindictive proceedings_, and so take
him in his own trap. Gammon then returned to the polling-booth, (having
named the signal by which he was to be apprised of success,) and resumed
his former position, without giving to any one near him the slightest
intimation of what he had been doing. If he imagined, however, that any
movement of _his_, at so critical a moment, had not been watched, he was
grievously mistaken. There were three persons whose sole business it had
been, during the whole of that day, to keep a lynx eye upon his every
motion, especially as connected with the Quaint Club. But his cunning
emissary was equal to the exigency; and having (unseen) reconnoitred the
streets for a few moments, he imagined that he detected one, if not two
spies, lurking about. He therefore slipped out of a low back window, got
down four or five back yards, and so across a small hidden alley, which
enabled him to enter, unperceivedly, into the back room of the house he
wished.

"Ben! Ben!" he gasped with an air of consternation.

"Hallo, man! what is 't?" quoth Ben.

"Done! every man of you sold! Mr. Gammon turned tail on you!--Just
happened to overhear him swear a solemn oath to Mr. Mudflint, that
before four-and-twenty hours"....

"Lord!--you did!--did you really?"

"So help me----!" exclaimed the man, aghast.

"What's to be done?" quoth Ben, the perspiration bursting out all over
his forehead. "We've been made the cursedest fools of by _some_
one!--Hang me if I think the old beast at Fotheringham, or the young cub
either, has ever meant"----

"What signifies it? It's all too late now."

"Isn't there _any_ way--eh? To be sure, I own I thought we were pitched
a _leetle_ too high with Mr. Gam"----

"But he has you _now_, though; and you'll find he's a devil
incarnate!--But stop, I see"--he seemed, as if a thought had suddenly
glanced across his puzzled and alarmed mind--"I'll tell you how to do
him, and save yourselves yet."

"O Lord!--eh?" exclaimed Ben, breathlessly.

"But are your men all together?"

"Oh ay! in five minutes' time we could all be on our way to the booth."

"Then don't lose a minute--or all's up forever!--Don't explain to them
the fix they're in till it's all over--and if _ever_ you tell 'em, or
any one, the bit o' service I've"----

"Never, Thomas, so help me----!" quoth Ben, grasping his companion's
hand, as in a vice.

"Off all of you to the booth, and poll for life and death, for
_Titmouse_."

"What? Come--come, Master Thomas!"

"Ay, ay--you fool! Don't you see? Make him win the election, and then,
_in course_, Gammon's no cause to be at you--he'll have got all he
wants."

"My eyes!" exclaimed Ben, as he suddenly perceived the stroke of policy.
He snapped his finger, buttoned his coat, popped out of the
house--within a few moments he was in the midst of the club, who were
all in a back yard, behind a small tavern which they frequented. "Now,
lads!" he exclaimed with a wink of his eye. He took the yellow and the
blue colors out of his bosom: returned the blue, and mounted the yellow:
so in a trice did every one present, not one single question having been
asked at Ben, in whom they had perfect confidence.

But, to return to Mr. Gammon. It was now a moment or two past the half
hour--there was scarcely half an hour more before the election must
close. The mob were getting sullen. The Quaint Club were being asked
for--now with hisses, then with cheers. All eyes were on Gammon, who
felt that they were. His face bore witness to the intensity of his
emotions; he did not any longer even attempt to disguise his desperate
disappointment. His nerves were strung to their highest pitch of
tension; and his eye glanced incessantly, but half-closed, towards a
corner house at a little distance; ah! that eye was suddenly lit up, as
it were, with fire--never had been such an instantaneous change seen in
a man's face before. He had at length caught the appointed signal; a man
appeared at a window, and appeared accidentally to drop a little stick
into the street. A mighty sigh escaped from the pent-up bosom of Gammon,
and relieved him from a sense of suffocation. His feelings might have
been compared to those excited in our great commander, when the
Prussians made their appearance at Waterloo. The battle was won; defeat
converted into triumph; but suddenly recollecting himself--aware that
every muscle of his face was watched--he relapsed into his former gloom.
Presently were heard the approaching sounds of music--nearer and nearer
came the clash of cymbals, the clangor of trombone and trumpet, the roll
of the drum;--all the crowd turned their faces towards the quarter
whence the sounds came, and within a few seconds' time was seen turning
the corner, full on its way to the booth, the banner of the Quaint
Club, with yellow rosettes streaming from the top of each pole--yellow
ribbons on every one's breast. THE PEOPLE'S CAUSE HAD TRIUMPHED! Their
oppressors were prostrate! A wild and deafening shout of triumph burst
from the crowd, as if they had been one man; and continued for several
minutes intermingled with the inspiriting sounds of the noble air--"Rule
Britannia!" played by the two bands, (that of Mr. Titmouse having
instantly joined them.) On marched the club, two and two, arm in arm,
with rapid step; their faces flushed with excitement and
exultation--their hands vehemently shaken by the shouting crowd, who
opened a broad lane for them up to the polling-booth. Oh, the contrast
exhibited in the faces of those standing _there_! What gloom, what
vexation, what despair, on the one hand--what signs of frantic
excitement, joy, and triumph, on the other! "Titmouse!" cried the first
member of the club, as he gave his vote; "Titmouse!" cried the second;
"Titmouse!" cried the third; "Titmouse!" cried the fourth. The battle
was won. Mr. Titmouse was in a majority, which went on increasing every
minute, amid tremendous cheering. Mr. Gammon's face and figure would at
that moment have afforded a study for a picture; the strongly repressed
feeling of triumph yet indicating its swelling influence upon his marked
and expressive countenance, where an accurate eye might have detected
also the presence of deep anxiety. Again and again were his hands shaken
by those near him--Mudflint, Bloodsuck, Woodlouse, Centipede, Going
Gone, Ginblossom--as they enthusiastically gave him credit for the
transcendent skill he had exhibited, and the glorious result it had
secured. As the church clock struck four, the books were closed, and the
election was declared at an end, with eighteen of Mr. Titmouse's voters
yet unpolled! Within a few minutes afterwards, Mr. Going Gone hastily
chalked upon the board, and held it up exultingly to the crowd,--

        Titmouse               237
        Delamere               149
                              ----
                  Majority      88!

"Hurrah!--hurrah!--hip, hip, hip, hurrah!" burst from the crowd,
while hands were upraised and whirled round, hats flung into
the air, and every other mark of popular excitement exhibited.
"Titmouse!--Titmouse!--NINE TIMES NINE FOR MR. TITMOUSE!" was called
for, and responded to with thrilling and overpowering effect. The newly
elected member, however, could not be pinched, or shaken, or roused, out
of the drunken stupor into which, from the combined influence of liquor
and excitement, he had sunk. To enable him to go through the responsible
duties of the day--viz. bobbing his head every now and then to the
worthy and independent electors who came to invest him with the proud
character of their representative in the House of Commons--he had
brought in his pocket a flask of brandy, which had been thrice
replenished: in a word, the popular idol was decidedly not presentable:
and under the impulse of strong emotion, Mr. Gammon, infinitely to the
disgust of the Reverend Smirk Mudflint, who was charged up to his throat
with combustible matter, and ready to go off at an instant's notice,
stepped forward, and on removing his hat, was received with several
distinct and long-continued rounds of applause. Silence having been at
length partially restored--

"Yes, gentlemen," he commenced in an energetic tone, and with an excited
and determined air and manner, "well may you utter those shouts of joy,
for you have fought a noble fight, and won a glorious victory, (_great
cheering._) Your cause, the cause of freedom and good government, is
triumphant over all opposition, (_immense cheering._) The hideous forms
of bigotry and tyranny are at this moment lying crushed and writhing,
(vehement cheering rendered the rest of the sentence inaudible.)
Gentlemen, truth and independence have this day met and overthrown
falsehood and slavery, (_cheers,_) in spite of the monstrous weapons
with which they came into the field, (_groans_)--bribery, (_groans,_)
corruption, (_groans,_) intimidation, (_hisses,_) coercion, and
treachery, (_mingled groans and hisses._) But, gentlemen, thank God, all
was in vain! (_enthusiastic cheering._) I will not say that a defeated
despot is at this moment sitting with sullen scowl in a neighboring
castle, (_tremendous shouts of applause;_) all his schemes frustrated,
all his gold scattered in vain, and trampled under foot by the virtuous
electors whom he sought first to corrupt, and then degrade into slaves,
(_great cheering._) Gentlemen, let us laugh at his despair, (_loud and
prolonged laughter;_) but let us rejoice like men, like freemen, that
the degraded and execrable _faction_ to which he belongs, is defeated,
(_cheering._) Gentlemen, if ever there was a contest in which public
spirit and principle triumphed over public and private profligacy, this
has been it; and by this time to-morrow, hundreds of constituencies will
be told, as their own struggles are approaching, to--_look at
Yatton_--to emulate her proud and noble example; and England will soon
be enabled to throw off the hateful incubus that has so long oppressed
her, (_immense cheering._) But, gentlemen, you are all exhausted, (_No!
no! and vehement cheers;_) Mr. Titmouse's friends are _all_ exhausted
after the great labor and excitement of this glorious day, and need
repose, in order that on the morrow we may meet refreshed, to enjoy the
full measure of our triumph, (_cheering._) In particular, your
distinguished representative, Mr. Titmouse, worn out with the excitement
of the day, long depressed by the adverse aspect of the poll, was so
overpowered with the sudden and glorious change effected by that band
of patriots who----(the rest of the sentence was drowned in cheering.)
Gentlemen, he is young, and unaccustomed to such extraordinary and
exciting scenes, (_hear, hear, hear!_) but by the morrow he will have
recovered sufficiently to present himself before you, and thank you with
enthusiasm and gratitude, (_cheers._) In his name, gentlemen, I do, from
my soul, thank you for the honor which you have conferred upon him, and
assure you that he considers any past success with which Providence may
have blessed him, (_hear, hear, hear!_) as nothing, when compared with
the issue of this day's struggle, (_cheering._) Rely upon it, that his
conduct in Parliament will not disgrace you, (_no, no, no!_) And now,
gentlemen, I must conclude, trusting that with victory will cease
animosity, and that there will be an immediate declaration of those
feelings of frank and manly cordiality, and good feeling, which ought to
distinguish free fellow-citizens, and which, above all, are signally
characteristic of Englishmen, (_cheering._) Shake hands, gentlemen, with
a fallen enemy, (_we will, we will!_) and forget, having conquered, that
you ever fought."

With these words, uttered with the fervor and eloquence which had indeed
distinguished the whole of his brief address, he resumed his hat, amid
tremendous shouts of "three times three for Mr. Titmouse!"--"three times
three for Mr. Gammon!"--"nine times nine groans for Mr. Delamere!"--all
of which were given with tumultuous energy. The two bands approached;
the procession formed; the nearly insensible Titmouse, his face deadly
pale, and his hat awry, was partly supported and partly dragged along
between Mr. Gammon and Mr. Going Gone; and to the inspiring air of "See
the Conquering Hero comes," and accompanied by the cheering crowd, they
all marched in procession to Mr. Titmouse's committee-room. He was
hurried up-stairs; then led into a bedroom; and there soon, alas!
experienced the overmastering power of sickness; which instantly
obliterated all recollection of his triumph, and made him utterly
unconscious of the brilliant position to which he had just been
elevated--equally to the honor of himself and his constituency, who
justly and proudly regarded

        "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQ., M. P."

as the glorious first-fruits to them of the glorious "_Bill for giving
Everybody Everything_."

At a late hour, that night, an interview took place between Ben Bran and
Mr. Gammon, of which all that I shall say at present is, that it was
equally confidential and satisfactory. There can be no harm, however, in
intimating that Mr. Gammon made no allusion to the arrival of the Greek
kalends; but he _did_ to----the fifteenth day after the meeting of
Parliament.[2] He satisfied Ben--and through him the Quaint Club--that
Lord De la Zouch's agents had been only deluding them, and had laid a
deep plan for ensnaring the club--which Gammon had early seen through,
and endeavored to defeat. A little circumstance which happened some two
or three days afterwards, seemed to corroborate the truth of at least a
portion of his statements--viz. eight prosecutions for bribery were
brought against so many members of the Quaint Club: and on their hastily
assembling to consult upon so startling an incident, one still more so
came to light;--_five leading members were not to be found_!! Writs in
actions for penalties of £500 each, were on the same day served
upon--Barnabas Bloodsuck, Smirk Mudflint, (otherwise called _the
Reverend_ Smirk Mudflint,) Cephas Woodlouse, and--woe is me that I
should have it to record!--"OILY GAMMON, gentleman, one of the attorneys
of our lord the king, before the king himself, at Westminster." The
amount claimed from him was £4,000; from Bloodsuck £3,000; and from
Mudflint £2,500, which would, alas! have alone absorbed all the
pew-rents of his little establishment for one hundred years to come, if
his system of moral teaching should so long live. What was the
consternation of these gentlemen to discover, when in their turn they
called a private meeting of their leading friends, that one of them also
was missing--viz. _Judas M'Do'em_! Moreover, it was palpable that amid
an ominous silence and calmness on the other side--even on the part of
the _True Blue_--the most guarded and systematic and persevering search
for evidence was going on; and with all Gammon's self-possession, the
sudden sight of Mr. Crafty stealthily quitting the house of an humble
Yellow voter, a week after the election, occasioned him somewhat
sickening sensations. Gammon was not unaccustomed to wade in deep
waters; but these were _very_ deep! However, a great point had been
gained. Mr. Titmouse was M. P. for Yatton; and Mr. Gammon had maintained
his credit in high quarters, where he had stood pledged as to the result
of the election; having been long before assured that every member
returned into the new Parliament was worth his weight in gold. Such were
the thoughts passing through the acute and powerful mind of Gammon, as
he sat late one night, shortly afterwards, alone at Yatton, Mr. Titmouse
having retired to his bedroom half stupefied with liquor, and anxious to
complete matters by smoking himself to sleep. The wind whistled
cheerlessly round the angle of the Hall in which was situated the room
where he sat, his feet resting on the fender, his arms folded, and his
eyes fixed on the fire. Then he took up the newspaper recently arrived
from town, which contained a report of his speech to the electors at the
close of the poll; it was the organ of the Whig party--the _Morning
Growl_; and its leading article commented in very encomiastic terms
upon his address, "given in another part of the paper." His soul heaved
with disgust at the thoughts of his own dissimulation;--"Independence!"
"Purity of Election!" "Public Principle!" "_Triumph of Principle!_"
"Popular enthusiasm!" "Man of the people!"--"_Look_," thought
he--"eugh--_at Titmouse_! Is _representation_ an utter farce--a mere
_imaginary_ privilege of the people? If not, what but public swindlers
are we who procure the return of such idiots as--faugh! Would I had been
on the other"----He rose, sighed, lit his chamber candle, and retired to
bed, but not to rest; for he spent several hours in endeavoring to
retrace every step which he had taken in the election--with a view to
ascertain how far it could be proved that he had legally implicated
himself. The position in which, indeed, he and those associated with him
in the proceedings, were placed, was one which required his most anxious
consideration, with a view, not merely to the retention of Mr.
Titmouse's seat, so hardly won, but to the tremendous personal
liabilities with which it was sought to fix himself, Gammon. The
inquiries which he instituted into the practices which he had been led
to believe prevailed openly upon the other side, led to no satisfactory
results. If the enemy had bribed, they had done so with consummate skill
and caution. Yet he chose to assume the _air_ of one who thought
otherwise; and gave directions for writs for penalties to be forthwith
served upon Mr. Parkinson, Mr. Gold, Mr. St. Aubyn, and Mr.
Milnthorpe--all of whom, as indeed he had expected, only laughed at him.
But it was wofully different as regarded himself and his friends; for,
before Mr. Crafty took his departure from Yatton, he had collected a
body of evidence, against all of them, of the most fearful stringency
and completeness. In fact, Lord De la Zouch had determined that, if it
cost him ten thousand pounds more, he would spare no effort, as well to
secure the seat for his son, as to punish those who had been guilty of
the atrocious practices which had been revealed to him.

Need I say with what intense interest, with what absorbing anxiety, the
progress of this contest had been watched by the Aubreys? From Lady De
la Zouch and other friends, but more especially from Dr. Tatham, who had
regularly forwarded the _True Blue_, and also written frequent and full
letters, they had learned, from time to time, all that was going on. Mr.
Aubrey had prepared them for the adverse issue of the affair; he had
never looked for anything else; but could he or any of them feel
otherwise than a painful and indignant sympathy with the little doctor,
on reading his account of the gross insult which had been offered to him
at the hustings? Kate, before she had read half of it, sprang from her
chair, threw down the letter, cried bitterly, then kissed the venerable
doctor's handwriting, and walked to and fro, flashing lightning from her
eyes, as her vivid fancy painted to her with painful distinctness that
scene of wanton and brutal outrage on one of the most gentle,
benevolent, and spotless of God's creatures, whose name was associated
in all their minds with everything that was pious, pure, and
good--indeed they were all powerfully affected. As for _the Reverend_
Smirk Mudflint--"Presumptuous wretch!" quoth Kate, as her flashing eye
met that of her brother: and he felt that his feelings, like her own,
could not be expressed. The first account she received of the outrage
perpetrated on Delamere was in the columns of the _True Blue_, which,
being published on the evening of the nomination, had been instantly
forwarded to town by Dr. Tatham. It blanched her cheek; she then felt a
mist coming over her eyes--a numbness--a faintness ensued, and she sank
upon the sofa, and swooned. It was a long while, after she had
recovered, before a flood of tears relieved her excitement. 'T was no
use disguising matters, even had she felt so disposed, before those who
felt so exquisite and vivid a sympathy with her; and who did not
restrain their ardent and enthusiastic expressions of admiration at the
spirited and noble manner in which Delamere had commenced and carried on
his adventure. At whose instance, and to please whom, had it been really
undertaken? Kate's heart fluttered intensely at the bare notion of
seeing him again in Vivian Street. He would come--she felt--with a sort
of _claim_ upon her!--And he made his at once desired and dreaded
appearance some days afterwards, quite unexpectedly. Kate was playing on
the piano, and had not heard his knock; so that he was actually in the
drawing-room before she was aware of his being in London, or had formed
the slightest expectation of such an event.

"Heavens, Mr. Delamere!--Is it you?" she stammered, rising from the
piano, her face having suddenly become pale.

"Ay, sweet Kate--unless I am become some one else, as--_the rejected of
Yatton_"--he replied fondly, as he grasped her hands fervently in his
own, and led her to the sofa.

"Don't--don't--Mr. Delamere"--said she, faintly, striving to disengage
one of her hands, which she instantly placed before her eyes to conceal
her rising emotion. Her brother and Mrs. Aubrey considerately came to
her relief, by engaging Delamere in conversation. He saw their object;
and releasing Miss Aubrey, for the present, from his attentions, soon
had entered into a long and very animated account of all his Yatton
doings. In spite of herself, as it were, Kate drew near the table, and,
engrossed with interest, listened, and joined in the conversation, as if
it had not been actually DELAMERE who was sitting beside her. He made
very light of the little accident of the wounded lip--but as he went on,
Kate looked another way, her eyes obstructed with tears, and her very
heart yearning towards him. "Oh, Mr. Delamere!"--she suddenly and
vehemently exclaimed--"what _wretches_ they were to use you so!" and
then blushed scarlet.

"Well--see if I'm not M.P. for Yatton, yet"--said Delamere, with a
confident air, just before he rose to go--"and that within a few weeks,
too, and _then_"----

"Don't be too sure of _that_," said Aubrey, gravely.

"Sure? I've no more doubt of it," replied Delamere, briskly, "than I
have of our now being in Vivian Street--if there be the slightest
pretence to fairness in a committee of the House of Commons. Why, upon
my honor, we've got no fewer than eleven distinct, unequivocal,
well-supported"----

"If election committees are to be framed of such people as appear to
have been returned"----....

Did, however, the gaudy flower of Titmouse's victory at Yatton contain
the seeds of inevitable defeat at St. Stephen's? 'T was surely a grave
question; and had to be decided by a tribunal, the constitution of
which, however, the legislature hath since, in its wisdom, seen fit
altogether to alter. With matters, therefore, as they then were--but now
are not--I deal freely, as with history.

The first glance which John Bull caught of his new House of Commons,
under the _Bill for giving Everybody Everything_, almost turned his
stomach, strong as it was, inside out; and he stood for some time
staring with feelings of alternate disgust and dismay. Really, as far at
least as outward appearance and behavior went, there seemed scarcely
fifty gentlemen among them; and those appeared ashamed and afraid of
their position. 'T was, indeed, as though the scum that had risen to
the simmering surface of the caldron placed over the fierce fires of
revolutionary ardor, had been ladled off and flung upon the floor of the
House of Commons. The shock and mortification produced such an effect
upon John, that he took for some time to his bed, and required a good
deal of severe treatment, before he in any degree recovered himself. It
was, indeed, a long while before he got quite right in his head!--As the
new House anticipated a good deal of embarrassment from the presidency
of the experienced and dignified person who had for many years filled
the office of Speaker, they chose a new one; and then, breathing freely,
started fair for the session.

Some fifty seats were contested; and one of the very earliest duties of
the new Speaker, was to announce the receipt of "a petition from certain
electors of the borough of Yatton, complaining of an undue return; and
praying the House to appoint a time for taking the same into its
consideration." Mr. Titmouse, at that moment, was modestly sitting
immediately behind the Treasury bench, next to a respectable
pork-butcher, who had been returned for an Irish county, and with whom
Mr. Titmouse had been dining at a neighboring tavern; where he had drunk
whiskey and water enough to elevate him to the point of rising to
present several petitions from his constituents--_first_, from Smirk
Mudflint, and others, for opening the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge to Dissenters of every denomination, and abolishing the
subscription to the Thirty-Nine Articles; _secondly_, from Mr. Hic Hæc
Hoc, praying for a commission to inquire into the propriety of
translating the Eton Latin and Greek grammars into English; _thirdly_,
from several electors, praying the House to pass an act for exempting
members of that House from the operation of the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Laws, as well as from arrest on mesne and final process; and
_lastly_, from certain other electors, praying the House to issue a
commission to inquire into the cause of the _Tick_ in sheep. I say this
was the auspicious commencement of his senatorial career, meditated by
Mr. Titmouse, when his ear caught the above startling words uttered by
the Speaker; which so disconcerted him--prepared though he was for some
such move on the part of his enemies, that he resolved to postpone the
presentation of the petitions of his enlightened constituents, till the
ensuing day. After sitting in a dreadful fright for some twenty minutes
or so, he felt it necessary to go out and calm his flurried spirits with
a glass of brandy and soda-water. As he was leaving the House, a little
incident happened to him, which was attended with very memorable
consequences.

"A word with you, sir," whispered a commanding voice, in his ear, as he
felt himself caught hold of by some one sitting at the corner of the
Treasury Bench--"I'll follow you out--_quietly_, mind."

The speaker was a Mr. SWINDLE O'GIBBET, a tall, elderly, and somewhat
corpulent person, with a broad-brimmed hat, a slovenly surtout, and
vulgar swaggering carriage; a ruddy shining face, that constantly wore a
sort of greasy smile; and an unctuous eye, with a combined expression of
cunning, cowardice, and ferocity. He spoke in a rich brogue, and with a
sort of confidential and cringing familiarity; yet, withal, 't was with
the air and the tone of a man conscious of possessing great direct
influence out of doors, and indirect influence within doors. 'T was, in
a word, at once insinuating and peremptory--submissive and truculent.
Several things had concurred to give Titmouse a very exalted notion of
Mr. O'Gibbet. First, a noble speech of his, in which he showed infinite
"_pluck_" in persevering against shouts of "order" from all parts of the
House for an hour together; secondly, his sitting on the front bench,
often close beside little LORD BULFINCH, the leader of the House. His
Lordship was a Whig; and though, as surely I need hardly say, there are
thousands of Whigs every whit as pure and high-minded as their Tory
rivals, his Lordship was a very _bitter_ Whig. The bloom of original
Whiggism, however, ripening fast into the rottenness of Radicalism, gave
out at length an odor which was so offensive to many of his own early
friends, that they were forced to withdraw from him. Personally,
however, he was of respectable character, and a man of considerable
literary pretensions, and enjoyed that Parliamentary influence generally
secured to the possessor of talent, tact, experience, and temper. Now,
it certainly argued some resolution in Mr. O'Gibbet to preserve an air
of swaggering assurance and familiarity beside his aristocratic little
neighbor, whose freezing demeanor towards him--for his Lordship evinced
even a sort of shudder of disgust when addressed by him--Mr. O'Gibbet
felt to be visible to all around. Misery makes strange bed-fellows, but
surely politics stranger still; and there could not have been a more
striking instance of it, than in Lord Bulfinch and Mr. O'Gibbet sitting
side by side--as great a contrast in their persons as in their
characters. But the third and chief ground of Titmouse's admiration of
Mr. O'Gibbet, was a conversation--private and unheard the parties had
imagined it, in the lobby of the House; but every word whereof had our
inquisitive, but not excessively scrupulous, little friend contrived to
overhear--between Mr. O'Gibbet and Mr. FLUMMERY, a smiling supple Lord
of the Treasury, and whipper-in of the Ministry. Though generally
confident enough, on this occasion he trembled, frowned, and looked
infinitely distressed. Mr. O'Gibbet chucked him under the chin,
familiarly and good-humoredly, and said--"Oh, murther and Irish! what's
easier?--But it lies in a nut-shell. If you won't do it, I can't swim;
and if I can't swim, you sink--every mother's son of you. Oh, come,
come--give me a bit of a push at this pinch."

"That's what you've said so often"----

"Fait, an' what if I have? And look at the _shoves_ that I've given
_you_," said Mr. O'Gibbet, with sufficient sternness.

"But a--a--really we shall be found out! The House suspects already that
you and we"----

"Bah! bother! hubbabo! Propose you it; I get up and oppose
it--_vehemently_, do you mind--an' the blackguards opposite will carry
it for you, out of love for me, ah, ha!--Aisy, aisy--softly say I! Isn't
that the way to get along?" and Mr. O'Gibbet winked his eye.

Mr. Flummery, however, looked unhappy, and remained silent and
irresolute.

"Oh, my dear sir--_exporrige frontem_! Get along wid you, you know it's
for your own good," said Mr. O'Gibbet; and shoving him on
good-humoredly, left the lobby, while Mr. Flummery passed on, with a
forced smile, to his seat. He continued comparatively silent, and very
wretched, the whole night.

Two hours before the House broke up, but not till after Lord Bulfinch
had withdrawn, Mr. Flummery, seizing his opportunity, got up to do the
bidding, and eventually fulfilled the prophecy, of Mr. O'Gibbet, amid
bitter and incessant jeers and laughter from the opposition.

"Another such victory and we're undone," said Mr. Flummery, with a
furious whisper, soon afterwards to Mr. O'Gibbet.

"Och, go to the ould divil wid ye!" replied Mr. O'Gibbet, thrusting his
tongue into his cheek, and moving off.

Now Titmouse had contrived to overhear almost every word of the above
curious colloquy, and had naturally formed a prodigious estimate of Mr.
O'Gibbet, and his influence in the highest quarters.--But to
proceed.--Within a few minutes' time might have been seen Titmouse and
O'Gibbet earnestly conversing together, remote from observation, in one
of the passages leading from the lobby. Mr. O'Gibbet spoke all the while
in a tone which at once solicited and commanded attention. "Sir, of
course you know you've not a ghost of a chance of keeping your seat?
I've heard all about it. You'll be beat, sir,--dead beat; will never be
able to sit in this _Parlimint_, sir, for your own borough, and be
liable to no end o' penalties for bribery, besides. Oh, _my dear sir_,
how I wish I had been at your elbow! This would never have happened!"

"Oh, sir! 'pon my soul--I--I"--stammered Titmouse, quite thunderstruck
at Mr. O'Gibbet's words.

"Hush--st--_hush_, wid your chattering tongue, sir, or we'll be
overheard, and you'll be ruined," interrupted Mr. O'Gibbet, looking
suspiciously around.

"I--I--beg your pardon, sir, but I'll give up my seat. I'm most uncommon
sorry that ever--curse me if I care about being a mem"----

"Oh! and is _that_ the way you spake of being a mimber o' Parlimint? For
shame, for shame, not to feel the glory of your position, sir! There's
_millions_ o' gintlemen envying you, just now!--Sir, I see that you're
likely to cut a figure in the House."

"But, begging your pardon, sir, if it _costs_ such a precious long
figure--why, I've come down some four or five thousand pounds already,"
quoth Titmouse, twisting his hand into his hair.

"An' what if ye have? What's that to a gintleman o' your consequence in
the country? It's, moreover, only once and for all; only stick in
_now_--and you stay in for seven years, and come in for nothing next
general election; and now--d'ye hear me, sir? for time presses--retire,
and give the seat to a Tory if you will--(what's the name o' the
blackguard? Oh, it's young Delamere)--and have your own borough stink
under your nose all your days! But can you keep a secret like a
gintleman? Judging from your appearance, I should say yes--sir--is it
so?" Titmouse placed his hand over his beating heart, and with a great
oath solemnly declared that he would be "mum as death;" on which Mr.
O'Gibbet lowered his tone to a faint whisper--"You'll distinctly
understand I've nothing to do with it personally, but it's impossible,
sir--d'ye hear?--to fight the divil except with his own weapons--and
there are too many o' the enemies o' the people in the House--a little
_money_, sir--eh? Aisy, aisy--softly say I! Isn't that the way to get
along?" added Mr. O'Gibbet, with a rich leer, and poking Titmouse in the
ribs.

"'Pon my life that'll do--and--and--what's the figure, sir?"

"Sir, as you're a young mimber, and of Liberal principles," continued
Mr. O'Gibbet, dropping his tone still lower, "_three_ thousand
pounds"----Titmouse started as if he had been shot. "Mind, that
_clears_ you, sir, d'ye understand? Everything! Out and out, no
reservation at all at all--divil a bit!"

"'Pon my precious soul, I shall be ruined between you all!" gasped
Titmouse, faintly.

"Sir, you're not the man I took you for," replied Mr. O'Gibbet,
impatiently and contemptuously. "Don't you see a barleycorn before your
nose? You'll be _beat_ after spending three times the money I name, and
be liable to ten thousand pounds' penalties besides for bribery"----

"Oh, 'pon my life, sir, as for _that_," said Titmouse, briskly, but
feeling sick at heart, "I've no more to do with it than--my tiger"----

"Bah! you're a babby, I see!" quoth O'Gibbet, testily. "What's the name
o' your man o' business?--there's not a minute to lose--it's your
greatest friend I mane to be, I assure ye--tut, what's his name?"

"Mr. Gammon," replied Titmouse, anxiously.

"Let him, sir, be with me at my house in Ruffian Row by nine to-morrow
morning to a minute--and alone," said Mr. O'Gibbet, with his lip close
to Titmouse's ear--"and once more, d'ye hear, sir?--a breath about this
to any one, an' you're a ruined man--you're in my power most
complately!"--With this Mr. O'Gibbet and Mr. Titmouse parted--the former
having much other similar business on hand, and the latter determined to
hurry off to Mr. Gammon forthwith: and in fact he was within the next
five minutes in his cab, on his way to Thavies' Inn.

Mr. Gammon was at Mr. O'Gibbet's (of whom he spoke to Titmouse in the
most earnest and unqualified terms of admiration) at the appointed time:
and after an hour's private conference with him, they both went off to
Mr. Flummery's official residence in Pillory Place; but what passed
there I never have been able to ascertain with sufficient accuracy to
warrant me in laying it before the reader.

When the day for taking into consideration the YATTON PETITION had
arrived--on a voice calling out at the door of the House, "Counsel in
the Yatton petition!" in walked forthwith eight learned gentlemen, four
being of counsel for the petitioner, and four for the sitting
member--attended by their respective agents, who stood behind, while the
counsel took their seats at the bar of a very crowded and excited House;
for there were several election committees to be balloted for on that
day. The door was then locked; and the order of the day was read.
Titmouse might have been seen popping up and down about the back
ministerial benches, like a parched pea. On the front Treasury bench sat
Mr. O'Gibbet, his hat slouched over his fat face, his arms folded. On
the table stood several glasses, containing little rolls of paper, each
about two or three inches long, and with the name of every member of the
House severally inscribed on them. These glasses being placed before the
Speaker, the clerk rose, and taking out one or two of the rolls of paper
at a time, presented them to the Speaker; who, opening each, read out
aloud the name inscribed, to the House. Now, the object was, on such
occasions, to draw out the names of _thirty-three_ members then present;
which were afterwards to be reduced, by each party alternately striking
off eleven names, to ELEVEN--who constituted the committee charged with
the trial of the petition. Now the astute reader will see that,
imagining the House to be divided into two great classes, viz. those
_favorable_ and those _opposed_ to the petitioner--according to whose
success or failure a vote was retained, lost, or gained to the
_party_--and as the number of thirty-three cannot be more nearly divided
than into seventeen and sixteen, 't is said by those experienced in such
matters, that in cases where it ran so close--that side invariably and
necessarily won who drew the _seventeenth_ name; seeing that each party
having eleven names of those in his opponent's interest, to expunge out
of the thirty-three, he who luckily drew this prize of the SEVENTEENTH
MAN, was sure to have SIX good men and true on the committee against the
other's FIVE. And thus of course it was, in the case of a greater or
less proportion of favorable or adverse persons answering to their
names. So keenly was all this felt and appreciated by the whole House on
these interesting--these _solemn_, these _deliberative_, and JUDICIAL
occasions--that on every name being called, there were sounds heard,
and symptoms witnessed, indicative of eager delight or intense vexation.
Now, on the present occasion, it would at first have appeared as if some
unfair advantage had been secured by the opposition; since five of
_their_ names were called, to two of those of their opponents; but then
only one of the five _answered_, (it so happening that the other four
were absent, disqualified as being petitioned against, or exempt,) while
both of the _two_ answered!--You should have seen the chagrined faces,
and heard the loud acclamations of "Ts!--ts!--ts!" on either side of the
House, when their own men's names were thus abortively called over!--the
delight visible on the other side!--The issue long hung in suspense; and
at length the scales were evenly poised, and the House was in a state of
exquisite anxiety; for the next eligible name answered to, would really
determine which side was to gain or lose a seat.

"_Sir Ezekiel Tuddington_"--cried the Speaker, amid profound and
agitated silence. He was one of the opposition--but answered not; he was
absent. "Ts! ts! ts!" cried the opposition.

"_Gabriel Grubb_"--This was a ministerial man, who rose, and said he was
serving on another committee. "Ts! ts! ts!" cried the ministerial side.

"_Bennet Barleycorn_"--(opposition)--petitioned against. "Ts! ts! ts!"
vehemently cried out the opposition.

"PHELIM O'DOODLE"----

"Here!" exclaimed that honorable member, spreading triumph over the
ministerial, and dismay over the opposition side of the House; and the
thirty-three names having been thus called and answered to, a loud buzz
arose on all sides--of congratulation or despondency.

The fate of the petition, it was said, was already as good as
decided.--The parties having retired to "strike"[3] the committee,
returned in about an hour's time, and the following members were then
sworn in, and ordered to meet the next morning at eleven o'clock:--

         _Ministerial._          _Opposition._

    (1.) Sir Simper Silly.  (1.) Castleton Plume.

    (2.) Noah No-land.      (2.) Charles D'Eresby.

    (3.) Phelim O'Doodle.   (3.) Merton Mortimer.

    (4.) Micah M'Squash.    (4.) Sir Simon Alkmond, Bart.

    (5.) Sir Caleb Calf.    (5.) Lord Frederick Brackenbury.

    (6.) Och Hubbaboo.

And the six, of course, on their meeting, chose the _chairman_, who was
a sure card--to wit, SIR CALEB CALF, Bart.[4]

Mr. Delamere's counsel and agents, together with Mr. Delamere himself,
met at consultation that evening, all with the depressed air of men who
are proceeding with any undertaking _contra spem_. "Well, what think you
of our committee?" inquired, with a significant smile, Mr. Berrington,
the eloquent, acute, and experienced leading counsel. All present
shrugged their shoulders, but at length agreed that even with _such_ a
committee, their case was an overpowering one; that _no_ committee could
dare to shut their eyes to such an array of facts as were here
collected; the clearest case of _agency_ made out--Mr. Berrington
declared--that he had ever known in all his practice; and eleven
distinct cases of BRIBERY, supported each by at least three
unexceptionable witnesses; together with half-a-dozen cases of TREATING;
in fact, the whole affair, it was admitted, had been most admirably got
up, under the management of Mr. Crafty, (who was present,) and they
_must_ succeed.

"Of course, they'll call for proof of AGENCY first," quoth Mr.
Berrington, carelessly glancing over his enormous brief; "and we'll at
once fix this--what's his name--the Unitarian parson, Muff--Muffin--eh?"

"Mudflint--Smirk Mudflint"----

"Aha!--Well!--we'll begin with him, and----then trot out Bloodsuck and
Centipede. Fix _them_--the rest all follow, and they'll strike, in spite
of their committee--or--egad--we'll have a shot at the sitting member
himself."

By eleven o'clock the next morning the committee and the parties were in
attendance--the room quite crowded--such a quantity of Yatton
faces!--There, near the chairman, with his hat perched as usual on his
bushy hair, and dressed in his ordinarily extravagant and absurd
style--his glass screwed into his eye, and his hands stuck into his
hinder coat-pockets, and resting on his hips, stood Mr. Titmouse; and
after the usual preliminaries had been gone through, up rose Mr.
Berrington with the calm confident air of a man going to open a winning
case--and an overwhelming one he _did_ open--the chairman glancing
gloomily at the five ministerials on his right, and then inquisitively
at the five opposition members on his left. The statement of Mr.
Berrington was luminous and powerful. As he went on, he disclosed almost
as minute and accurate a knowledge of the movements of the Yellows at
Yatton, as Mr. Gammon himself could have supplied him with. That
gentleman shared in the dismay felt around him. 'T was clear that there
had been infernal treachery; that they were all ruined. "By Jove!
there's no standing up against _this_--in spite of our committee--unless
we break them down at the agency--for Berrington don't overstate his
cases," whispered Mr. Granville, the leading counsel for the sitting
member, to one of his juniors, and to Gammon; who sighed and said
nothing. With all his experience in the general business of his
profession, he knew, when he said this, little or nothing of what might
be expected from a _favorable election committee_. Stronger and
stronger, blacker and blacker, closer and closer, came out the
petitioner's case. The five opposition members paid profound attention
to Mr. Berrington, and took notes; while, as for the ministerials, one
was engaged with his betting book, another writing out franks, (in which
he dealt,) a third conning over an attorney's letter, and two were
quietly playing together at "_Tit-tat-to_." As was expected, the
committee called peremptorily for proof of AGENCY; and I will say only,
that if _Smirk Mudflint_, _Barnabas Bloodsuck_, and _Seth Centipede_,
were not fixed as the "AGENTS" of the sitting member--then there is no
such relation as that of principal and agent _in rerum naturâ_; there
never was in this world an agent who had a principal, or a principal who
had an agent.--Take only, for instance, the case of Mudflint. He was
proved to have been from first to last an active member of Mr.
Titmouse's committee; attending daily, hourly, and on hundreds of
occasions, in the presence of Mr. Titmouse--canvassing with
him--consulting him--making appointments with him for calling on voters,
which appointments he invariably kept; letters in his handwriting
relating to the election, signed some by Mr. Titmouse, some by Mr.
Gammon; circulars similarly signed, and distributed by Mudflint, and the
addresses in his handwriting; several election bills paid by him on
account of Mr. Titmouse; directions given by him and observed, as to the
bringing up voters to the poll; publicans' bills paid at the
committee-room, in the presence of Mr. Titmouse--and, in short, many
other such acts as these were established against all three of the above
persons. Such a dreadful effect did all this have upon Mr. Bloodsuck and
Mr. Centipede, that they were obliged to go out, in order to get a
little gin and water; for they were indeed in a sort of death-sweat. As
for Mudflint, he seemed to get sallower and sallower every minute; and
felt almost disposed to utter an inward prayer, had he thought it would
have been of the slightest use. Mr. Berrington's witnesses were fiercely
cross-examined, but no material impression was produced upon them; and
when Mr. Granville, on behalf of the sitting member, confident and
voluble, rose to prove to the committee that his learned friend's case
was one of the most trumpery that had ever come before a committee--a
mere bottle of smoke;--that the three gentlemen in question had been no
more the agents of the sitting member than was he--the counsel then on
his legs--the agent of the Speaker of the House of Commons, and that
every one of the petitioner's witnesses was unworthy of belief--in fact
_perjured_--how suddenly awake to the importance of the investigation
became the ministerialist members! They never removed their eyes from
Mr. Granville, except to take notes of his pointed, cogent, unanswerable
observations! _He called no witnesses._ At length he sat down; and
strangers were ordered to withdraw--and 'twas well they did: for such an
amazing uproar ensued among the committee, as soon as the five
opposition members discovered, to their astonishment and disgust, that
there was the least doubt among their opponents as to the establishment
of agency, as would not, possibly, have tended to raise that committee,
as a judicial body, in public estimation. After an hour and a half's
absence, strangers were readmitted. Great was the rush--for the fate of
the petition hung on the decision to be immediately pronounced. As soon
as the counsel had taken their seats, and the eager, excited crowd been
subdued into something like silence, the chairman, Sir Caleb Calf, with
a flushed face, and a very uneasy expression, read from a sheet of
foolscap paper, which he held in his hand, as follows:--

"Resolved--That the Petitioner's Counsel be directed to _proceed_ with
evidence of AGENCY," [_i. e._ the committee were of opinion that no
sufficient evidence had yet been given, to establish Messrs. Mudflint,
Bloodsuck, and Centipede, as the agents of Mr. Titmouse, in the election
for Yatton!!!] The five opposition members sat with stern indignant
faces, all with their backs turned towards the chairman; and nothing but
a very high tone of feeling, and chivalrous sense of their position, as
members of a public committee of the House of Commons, prevented their
repeating in public their fierce protest against the monstrous decision
at which the committee, through the casting voice of the redoubtable
chairman, had arrived.

Their decision was not immediately understood or appreciated by the
majority of those present. After a pause of some moments, and amid
profound silence--

"Have I rightly understood the resolution of the committee, sir,"
inquired Mr. Berrington, with an amazed air, "that the evidence already
adduced _is not sufficient_ to satisfy them as to the _agency_ of
Messrs. Mudflint, Bloodsuck, and Centipede?"

"The committee _meant_, sir, to express as much," replied the chairman,
dryly, and he sealed a letter with affected indifference: _affected_,
indeed! the letter being one addressed to a friend, to desire him
forthwith to take a hostile message on his--the chairman's--behalf to
Colonel D'Eresby, one of the committee, who had, during the discussion
with closed doors, spoken his mind pretty freely concerning the conduct
of the aforesaid chairman!

"Good God!" exclaimed Mr. Berrington, (on receiving the chairman's
answer to his inquiry,) in a tone of voice loud enough to be heard all
over the room, "_neither would they believe though one rose from the
dead_."

"We'd better strike," said his juniors.

"I think so, too," said Mr. Berrington; adding, as he turned towards
the committee with an air of undisguised disgust, "I protest, sir, that
never in the whole course of my experience have I been so astounded as I
am at the decision to which the committee has just come. Probably, under
these circumstances, the committee will be pleased to adjourn till the
morning, to give us an opportunity of considering the course we shall
pursue." (This produced a great sensation.)

"Certainly, let it be so," replied the chairman, blandly, yet anxiously;
and the committee broke up. Before they met again, three shots a-piece
had been exchanged between the chairman and Colonel D'Eresby--"happily
without effect," and the parties left the ground in as hostile a spirit
as they had reached it. I will say for the colonel, that he was a plain,
straightforward soldier, who did not understand nonsense, nor could
tolerate coquetting with an oath.

"Of course the petition is dropped?" said Mr. Berrington, bitterly, as
soon as all were assembled in the evening, in consultation at his
chambers.

"Of course," was the answer, in a sufficiently melancholy tone.

"So help me heaven!" said Mr. Berrington, "I feel disposed to say I will
never again appear before a committee. This sort of thing cannot go on
much longer! To think that every man of that committee is sworn before
God to do his duty! I'll take care to strike every one of those six men
off from any future list that _I_ may have to do with!"

"I can say only," remarked the second counsel, a calm and experienced
lawyer, "that, in my opinion, had all of us sat down to frame,
beforehand, a perfect case of agency--with facts at will--we could never
have framed one stronger than the one to-day declared insufficient."

"I have been in seven other petitions," said Mr. Berrington, "this very
week; but there the sitting members were Tories: Gracious Heaven! what
facts have been _there_ held sufficient proof of agency!--The _Barnard
Castle_ committee yesterday held that to have been seen once shaking
hands in a pastry-cook's shop with the sitting member, was sufficient
evidence of _agency_--and we've lost the seat! In the _Cucumber_
committee, a man who by chance stood once under a doorway with the
sitting member, in a sudden shower of rain--was held thereby to have
become his agent; and we _there_ also lost the seat!--Faugh! what would
foreigners say if they heard such things?"

"It's perhaps hardly worth mentioning," said Mr. Parkinson; "but this
afternoon I happened to see Mr. O'Gibbet dining with Mr. O'Doodle, Mr.
Hubbaboo, and Mr. M'Squash, off pork and greens, at the Jolly Thieves'
Tavern, in Dodge Street----I--I--they were talking together very
eagerly"----

"The less we say about _that_ the better," replied Mr. Berrington; "I
have not had my eyes shut, I can tell you! It's a hard case, Mr. Crafty;
but after all your pains, and the dreadful expense incurred, it's
nevertheless quite farcical to think of going on with a committee like
this"----

"Of course the petition is abandoned," replied Crafty.

The next morning they again appeared before the committee.

"I have to inform the committee," commenced Mr. Berrington, with
sufficient sternness, "that my learned friends and I, who had, in our
ignorance and inexperience, imagined, till yesterday, that the evidence
we then opened was ten times more than sufficient to establish agency
before any _legal_ tribunal"----

"Counsel will be pleased to moderate their excitement, and to treat the
committee with due respect," interrupted the chairman, warmly, and
reddening as he spoke; while the ministerial members looked very
fiercely at Mr. Berrington, and one or two placed their arms a-kimbo.

--"Have come to the determination to withdraw the petitioner's case from
before the committee; as, under existing circumstances, it would be
utterly absurd to attempt"----

"Fait, sir, an' you're mighty indacent--ye are--an' you'd better keep a
civil tongue in your head," said Mr. O'Doodle, fiercely, and with an
insolent look at Mr. Berrington.

"Sir," said the latter, addressing Mr. O'Doodle with a bitter smile--"as
it is possible to stand where I do without ceasing to be a gentleman, so
it is possible to sit _there_--without becoming one."

"Sir--Misther Chairman--I'll only just ask you, sir--isn't _that_ a
brache of privelige"----

"Oh, be aisy--aisy wid ye--and isn't he _hired_ to say all this?"
whispered Mr. Hubbaboo; and the indignant senator sat down.

"The petition is withdrawn, sir," said Mr. Berrington, calmly.

"Then," subjoined his opponent, as quietly rising as his learned friend
had sat down, "I respectfully apply to the committee to vote it
_Frivolous and vexatious_."

"Possibly the committee will pause before going _that_ length," said Mr.
Berrington, very gravely; but he was mistaken. Strangers were ordered to
withdraw; and, on their readmission, the chairman read the resolution of
the committee, that "Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq., had been and was duly
elected to serve for the borough of Yatton; and that the petition
against his return was FRIVOLOUS and VEXATIOUS:" by which decision, all
the costs and expenses incurred by Mr. Titmouse were thrown upon his
opponent, Mr. Delamere--a just penalty for his wanton and presumptuous
attempt. This decision was welcomed by the crowd in the committee-room
with clapping of hands, stamping of feet, and cheering.--Such was the
fate of the YATTON PETITION. Mr. Titmouse, on entering the House that
evening, was received with loud cheers from the ministerial benches: and
within a few minutes afterwards, Lord Frederick Brackenbury, to give the
House and the public an idea of the important service performed by the
committee, rose and moved that the _evidence should be printed_--which
was ordered.

The next day a very distinguished patriot gathered some of the blooming
fruit of the _Bill for giving Everybody Everything_--(not for himself
personally, however, but _as a trustee for the public_;) so, at least, I
should infer from the following fact, that whereas in the morning his
balance at the banker's was exactly £3, 10s. 7-1/2d.--by the afternoon,
it was suddenly augmented to £3,003, 10s. 7-1/2d.--shortly expressed
thus:--

    "£3: 10: 7-1/2 + £3,000 = £3,003: 10: 7-1/2."

Thus might my friend Titmouse exclaim, "Out of this nettle _danger_ I
have plucked the flower _safety_!" 'T was, indeed, fortunate for the
country, that such, and so early, had been the termination of the
contest for the representation of Yatton; for it enabled Mr. Titmouse at
once to enter, with all the energy belonging to his character, upon the
discharge of his legislatorial functions. The very next day after his
own seat had been secured to him by the decision of the committee, he
was balloted for, and chosen one of the members of a committee of which
_Swindle O'Gibbet, Esquire_, was chairman, for trying the validity of
the return of two Tory impostors for an Irish county. So marvellously
quick an insight into the merits of the case did he and his brethren in
the committee obtain, that they intimated, on the conclusion of the
petitioner's counsel's opening address, that it would be quite
superfluous for him to call witnesses in support of a statement of
facts, which it was presumed the sitting members could not think of
seriously contesting. Against this, the sitting members' counsel
remonstrated with indignant energy; on which the committee thought it
best to let him take his own course, which would entail its own
consequences; viz. that the opposition to the petition would be voted
frivolous and vexatious. A vast deal of evidence was then adduced, after
which, as might have been expected, the committee reported to the House,
that Lord Beverly de Wynston (who owned half the county for which he had
presumed to stand) and Sir Harry Eddington, (who owned pretty near the
other half,) both being resident in the county, had been unduly
returned; that two most respectable gentlemen, Mr. O'Shirtless and Mr.
O'Toddy (the one a discarded attorney's clerk, and the other an
insolvent publican, neither of whom had ever been in the county till the
time of the election) ought to have been returned; and the clerk of the
House was to amend the return accordingly; and that the opposition to
the petition had been frivolous and vexatious: which last was an
ingenious and happy device for making the peer and baronet pay the
expense of Messrs. O'Shirtless and O'Toddy's election! Mr. Titmouse
after this formed an intimate acquaintance with the two gentlemen, whom,
infinitely to their own astonishment, he had helped to seat for the
county, and who had many qualities kindred to his own, principally in
the matter of dress and drink. Very shortly afterwards he was elected
one of a committee to inquire into the operation of the Usury Laws, and
another of a still more important character--viz. to inquire into the
state of our relations with foreign powers, with reference to free trade
and the permanent preservation of peace. They continued sitting for a
month, and the latter thus stated the luminous result of their inquiry
and deliberation, in their report to the House: "That the only effectual
mode of securing permanently the good-will of foreign powers, was by
removing all restrictions upon their imports into this country, and
imposing prohibitory duties upon our exports into theirs; at the same
time reducing our naval and military establishments to a point which
should never thereafter occasion uneasiness to any foreign power. And
that any loss of revenue occasioned by the adoption of the former
suggestion, would be compensated for by the saving of expenditure
effected by carrying into effect the latter." He also served on one or
two private committees, attended by counsel. In the course of their
inquiries many very difficult and complicated questions arose, which
called forth great ability on the part of counsel. On one occasion, in
particular, I recollect that Mr. DEPTH, one of the most dexterous and
subtile reasoners to be found at the English bar, having started the
great question really at issue between the parties, addressed a long and
most masterly argument to the committee. He found himself, after some
time, making rapid way with them; and in particular, there were
indications that he had at length powerfully arrested the attention of
Mr. Titmouse, who, with his chin resting on his open hand, and his elbow
on the table, leaned forward towards Mr. Depth, on whom he fixed his eye
apparently with deep attention. How mistaken, however, was Depth!
Titmouse was thinking all the while of two very different matters; viz.
whether he could possibly sit it out without a bottle of soda-water,
laboring as he was, under the sickening effects of excessive potations
over-night; and also whether his favorite little terrier, Titty, would
win or lose in her encounter on the morrow with fifty rats--that being
the number which Mr. Titmouse had betted three to one she would kill in
three minutes' time. The decision to which that committee might come,
would affect interests to the amount of nearly a million sterling, and
might or might not occasion a monstrous invasion of vested rights!

He still continued to occupy his very handsome apartments at the Albany.
You might generally have seen him, about ten o'clock in the morning, (or
say _twelve_, when his attendance was not required upon committees,)
reclining on his sofa, enveloped in a yellow figured satin
dressing-gown, smoking an enormous hookah; with a little table before
him, with a decanter of gin, cold water, and a tumbler or two upon it.
On a large round table near him lay a great number of dinner and evening
cards, notes, letters, public and private, vote-papers, and
Parliamentary reports. Beside him, on the sofa, lay the last number of
the _Sunday Flash_--to which, and to the _Newgate Calendar_, his reading
was, in fact, almost entirely confined. Over his mantelpiece was a large
hideous oil-painting of two brawny and half-naked ruffians, in boxing
attitude; opposite was a very large picture (for which he had given
seventy guineas) of Lord Scaramouch's dog Nestor, in his famous
encounter with two hundred rats, which he killed in the astonishingly
short space of seven minutes and fifteen seconds. Opposite to the door,
however, was the great point of attraction; viz. a full-length portrait
of Titmouse himself. His neck was bare, his ample shirt-collar being
thrown down over his shoulders, and his face looking upwards. The artist
had labored hard to give it that fine indignant expression with which,
in pictures of men of genius, they are generally represented as looking
up towards the moon; but nature was too strong for him--his eye too
accurate, and his brush too obedient to his eye; so that the only
expression he could bring out was one of sensuality and stupid wonder. A
rich green mantle enveloped Titmouse's figure; and amid its picturesque
folds, was visible his left hand, holding them together, and with a
glittering ring on the first and last fingers. In one corner of the
room, on a table, were a pair of foils; and on the ground near them,
three or four pairs of boxing-gloves. On another table lay a guitar--on
another a violin; on both of which delightful instruments he was taking
almost daily lessons. Though the room was both elegantly and expensively
furnished, (according to the taste of its former occupant,) it was now
redolent--as were Mr. Titmouse's clothes--of the odors of tobacco-smoke
and gin and water. Here it was that Mr. Titmouse would often spend hour
after hour boxing with Billy Bully, the celebrated prize-fighter and
pickpocket; or, when somewhat far gone in liquor, playing cribbage or
put with his valet--an artful, impudent fellow, who had gained great
influence over him.

As for the House--Modesty (the twin-sister of Merit) kept Mr. Titmouse
for a long time very quiet there. He saw the necessity of attentively
watching everything which passed around him, in order to become
practically familiar with the routine of business, before he ventured to
step forward into action, and distinguish himself. He had not been long,
however, thus prudently occupied, when an occasion presented itself, of
which he availed himself with all the bold felicitous promptitude of
genius--whose prime distinguishing characteristic is the successful
seizure of opportunity. He suddenly saw that he should be able to bring
into play an early accomplishment of his--one of which, when acquiring
it, how little he dreamed of the signal uses to which it might be
afterwards turned! The great Coke hath somewhere said to the legal
student, that there is no kind or degree of knowledge whatsoever, so
apparently vain and useless that it shall not, if remembered, at one
time or other serve his purpose. Thus it seemed about to be with Mr.
Titmouse, to whom it chanced in this wise. In early life, while
following the humble calling in which he was occupied when first
presented to the reader, he used to amuse himself, in his long journeys
about the streets, with bundle and yard-measure under his arm, by
imitating the cries of cats, the crowing of cocks, the squeaking of
pigs, the braying of donkeys, and the yelping of curs; in which matters
he became at length so great a proficient, as to attract the admiring
attention of passers-by, and to afford great entertainment to the
circles in which he visited. There is probably no man living, though
ever so great a fool, who cannot do _something_ or other well; and
Titmouse became a surprising proficient in the arts I have alluded to.
He could imitate a _bluebottle fly_ buzzing about the window, and,
lighting upon it, abruptly cease its little noise, and anon flying off
again, as suddenly resume it;--a _chicken_, peering and picking its way
cautiously among the growing cabbages;--a _cat_, at midnight on the
moonlit tiles, pouring forth the sorrows of her heart on account of the
absence of her inconstant mate;--a _cock_, suddenly waking out of some
horrid dream--it might be the nightmare--and in the ecstasy of its
fright, crowing as though it would split at once its throat and heart,
alarming all mankind;--a little _cur_, yelping with mingled fear and
rage, at the same time, as it were, advancing backwards, in view of a
fiendish tomcat, with high-curved back, flaming eyes, and spitting
fury. I only wish you had heard Mr. Titmouse on these occasions; it
might, perhaps, even have reminded you of the observation of Dr.
Johnson, that genius, is, "great natural powers accidentally directed."

Now there was, on a certain night, about three months after Titmouse had
been in the House, a kind of pitched battle between the ministry and
their formidable opponents; in which the speakers on each side did their
best to prove (and in the opinion of many, _successfully_) that their
opponents were apostates; utterly worthless; destitute alike of public
and private virtue; unfit to govern; and unworthy of the confidence of
the country, which aforesaid country was indeed in happy plight in
possessing a Parliament unanimous in one thing at least--viz. its own
worthlessness. My Lord Bulfinch rose late on the third evening of the
debate--never had been seen so full a House during the session--and in a
long and able speech contended, (first,) that the opposite side were
selfish, ignorant, and dishonest; and (secondly,) that Ministers had
only imitated their example. He was vehemently cheered from time to
time, and sat down amid a tempest of applause. Up then rose the
ex-minister and leaders of the opposition, and in a very few moments
there was scarce a sound to be heard except that of the delicious
voice--at once clear, harmonious, distinct in utterance, and varied in
intonation--of incomparably the finest Parliamentary orator of the day,
Mr. VIVID. The hearts of those around him, who centred all their hopes
in him, beat with anxious pride. He had a noble cast of countenance--a
brilliant eye--strongly marked and most expressive features--a
commanding figure--a graceful and winning address. His language,
accurate, refined, copious, and vigorous, every word he uttered, _told_.
His illustrations were as rich and apt as his reasonings were close and
cogent; and his powers of ridicule were unrivalled. On the present
occasion he was thoroughly roused, and put forth all his powers: he and
Lord Bulfinch had been waiting for each other during the whole debate;
but Mr. Vivid had at length secured the reply, and truly regarded
himself as the mouthpiece of a great and grievously slandered party in
the state, whom he had risen to vindicate from the elaborate and
envenomed aspersions of Lord Bulfinch, who sat, speedily pierced
through and through with the arrows of poignant sarcasm, amid the loud
laughter of even his own side, so irresistible was the humor of the
speaker. Even Mr. O'Gibbet, who had been from time to time exclaiming
half aloud to those around--"Och, the pitiful fellow! The stupid
baste!--Nivir mind him--Divil a word, my Lord!"--was at length subdued
into silence. In fact, the whole House was rushing along with the rapid,
brilliant, and impassioned speaker. Every now and then, vehement and
tumultuous cheering would burst forth from the opposition, as from one
man, answered by as vehement and determined cheering from the
ministerial benches; but you could not fail to observe an anxious and
alarmed expression stealing over the faces of Lord Bulfinch's
supporters. His Lordship sat immovably, with his arms folded, and eyes
fixed on his opponent, and a bitter smile on his face, glancing
frequently, however, with increasing anxiety towards Mr. O'SQUEAL, the
only "great gun" he had left--that gentleman having undertaken (_infelix
puer, atque impar congressus Achilli!_) to reply to Mr. Vivid. Poor Mr.
O'Squeal himself looked pale and dispirited, and would probably have
given up all his little prospects to be able to sneak away from the post
he had so eagerly occupied, and devolve upon others the responsibility
of replying to a speech looming more and more dreadfully upon his
trembling faculties every moment, as infinitely more formidable in all
points of view than anything he had anticipated. The speech must
electrify the public, even as it was then electrifying the House. He
held a sheet of paper in one hand resting on his knee, and a pen in the
other, with which he incessantly took notes--only to disguise his
fright; for his mind went not with his pen--all he heard was above and
beyond him; he might as well have thought of whistling down a whirlwind;
yet there was no escape for him. Was the uneasy eye of Lord Bulfinch,
more and more frequently directed towards him, calculated to calm or
encourage him? or the sight of the adroit, sarcastic, and brilliant
debater sitting opposite, who had his eye on Mr. O'Squeal, and was
evidently to rise and reply to him? Mr. O'Squeal began to feel cold as
death, and at length burst into a chilly perspiration. After a two
hours' speech, of uncommon power and brilliance, Mr. Vivid wound up with
a rapid and striking recapitulation of the leading points of his policy
when in power, which, he contended, were in triumphant contrast with
those of his successors, which were wavering, inconsistent, perilous to
every national interest, and in despicable subservience to the vilest
and lowest impulses. "And now, sir," said Mr. Vivid, turning to the
Speaker, and then directing a bold and indignant glance of defiance at
Lord Bulfinch--"does the noble Lord opposite talk of _impeachment_! I
ask him in the face of this House, and of the whole country, whose eyes
are fixed upon it with anxiety and agitation--will he presume to repeat
his threat? or will any one on his behalf?"--(turning a glance of
withering scorn towards Mr. O'Squeal)--"Sir, I pause for a reply!"--And
he _did_ pause--several seconds elapsing in dead silence, which was
presently, however, broken in a manner that was perfectly unprecedented,
and most astounding. 'T was a reply to his question; but such as, had he
anticipated it, he would never have put that question, or paused for its
answer.

"_Cock-a-doodle-do-o-o-o!_" issued, with inimitable fidelity of tone and
manner, from immediately behind Lord Bulfinch, who sprang from his seat
as if he had been shot. Every one started; Mr. Vivid recoiled a pace or
two from the table--and then a universal peal of laughter echoed from
all quarters of the House, not excepting even the strangers' gallery.
The Speaker was convulsed, and could not rise to call "order." Lord
Bulfinch laughed himself almost into fits; even those immediately behind
Mr. Vivid were giving way to uncontrollable laughter, at so comical and
monstrous an issue. He himself tried for a moment to join in the laugh,
but in vain; he was terribly disconcerted and confounded. This frightful
and disgusting incident had done away with the effect of his whole
speech; and in twenty-four hours' time, the occurrence would be exciting
merriment and derision in every corner of the kingdom!

"Order! order! order!" cried the Speaker, his face red and swollen with
scarce subdued laughter. Several times Mr. Vivid attempted to resume,
only, however, occasioning renewed peals of laughter. Still he
persevered; and, with much presence of mind, made a pointed and witty
allusion to Rome, saved by the cackling of a goose, in which manner he
said the ministers hoped that night to be saved! 'T was, however,
plainly useless; and after a moment or two's pause of irresolution, he
yielded to his miserable fate, with visible vexation abruptly concluded
his observations, gathered hastily together his papers, and resumed his
seat and his hat--a signal for renewed laughter and triumphant cheering
from the ministerial side of the House. Up _then_ started Mr.
O'Squeal--(as it were under cover of the cock)--and dashed boldly off at
one or two of the weakest points which had been made by his discomfited
adversary, which he dealt with very dexterously; and then threw up a
vast number of rhetorical fireworks, amid the glitter and blaze of which
he sat down, and was enthusiastically cheered. 'T was my friend Mr.
Titmouse that had worked this wonder, and entirely changed the fate of
the day! Up rose Mr. O'Squeal's dreaded opponent--but in vain; he was
quite crestfallen; evidently in momentary apprehension of receiving an
interruption similar to that which Mr. Vivid had experienced. He was
nervous and fidgety--as well he might be; and would most assuredly have
shared the fate of Mr. Vivid, but that Titmouse was (not without very
great difficulty) restrained by Lord Bulfinch, on the ground that the
desired effect had been produced, and would be only impaired by a
repetition. The debate came somewhat abruptly to a close; and the
opposition were beaten by a majority of a _hundred and thirty_--which
really looked something like a working majority.

This happy occurrence at once brought Mr. Titmouse into notice, and very
great favor with his party;--well, indeed, it might, for he had become a
most powerful auxiliary, and need it be added how dreaded and detested
he was by their opponents? How could it be otherwise, with even their
leading speakers, who could scarcely ever afterwards venture on anything
a little out of the common way--a little higher flight than usual--being
in momentary apprehension of being suddenly brought down by some such
disgusting and ludicrous interruption as the one I have mentioned,
indicating the effect which the ambitious speaker was producing upon--a
cat, a donkey, a cock, or a puppy? Ah, me! what a sheep's eye each of
them cast, as he went on, towards Titmouse! And if ever he was observed
to be absent, there was a sensible improvement in the tone and spirit
of the opposition speakers. The ministerial journals all over the
country worked the joke well; and in their leading articles against
any of Mr. Vivid's speeches, would "sum up all, in one memorable
word--'_cock-a-doodle-do!_'"

As is generally the case, the signal success of Mr. Titmouse brought
into the field a host of imitators in the House; and their performances,
inferior though they were, becoming more and more frequent, gave quite a
new character to the proceedings of that dignified deliberative
assembly. At length, however, it was found necessary to pass a
resolution of the House against such practices; and it was entered on
the journals, that thenceforth no honorable member should interrupt
business by whistling, singing, or imitating the sounds of animals, or
making any other disgusting noise whatsoever.

The political importance thus acquired by Mr. Titmouse--and which he
enjoyed till the passing of the above resolution, by which it was cut up
root and branch--had naturally a very elevating effect upon him; as you
might have perceived, had you only once seen him swaggering along the
House to his seat behind the front Treasury bench, dressed in his usual
style of fashion, and with his quizzing-glass stuck into his eye. Mr.
O'Gibbet invariably greeted him with the utmost cordiality, and would
often, at a pinching part of an opposition speech, turn round and invoke
his powers, by the exclamation--"Now, now, Titty!" He dined, in due
course, with the Speaker--as usual, in full court-dress; and, having got
a little champagne in his head, insisted on going through his leading
"imitations," infinitely to the amusement of some half dozen of the
guests, and _all_ the servants. His circle of acquaintance was extending
every day; he became a very welcome guest, as an object of real
curiosity. He was not a man, however, to be always enjoying the
hospitality of others, without at least offering a return; and, at the
suggestion of an experienced friend in the House, he commenced a series
of "Parliamentary dinners," (presumptuous little puppy!) at the
Gliddington Hotel. They went off with much _éclat_, and were duly
chronicled in the daily journals, as thus:--

     "On Saturday, Mr. Titmouse, M. P., entertained (his third dinner
     given this session) at the Gliddington Hotel, the following (among
     others) distinguished members of the House of Commons: Lord Nothing
     Nowhere, Sir Simper Silly, Mr. Flummery, Mr. O'Gibbet, Mr. Outlaw,
     Lord Beetle, Colonel Quod, and several others."

Mr. Titmouse, at length, thought himself warranted in inviting Lord
Bulfinch!--and the SPEAKER!!--and LORD FIREBRAND, (the Foreign
Secretary;) all of whom, however, very politely declined, pleading
previous engagements. I can hardly, in fairness, give Mr. Titmouse the
credit of these latter proceedings; which were, in fact, suggested to
him, in the first instance, by two or three young wags in the House;
who, barring a little difference in the way of bringing up, were every
whit as great fools and coxcombs as himself, and equally entitled to the
confidence of their favored constituencies, and of the country, as so
calculated for the purpose of practical legislation, and that
remodelling of the national institutions of the country, upon which the
new House of Commons seemed bent.

Have YOU, reader, ever given your vote and interest to return a TITMOUSE
to Parliament?

'T was truly delightful to see the tables of these young gentlemen
groaning under daily accumulations of Parliamentary documents,
containing all sorts of political and statistical information, collected
and published with vast labor and expense, for the purpose of informing
their powerful intellects upon the business of the country, so that they
might come duly prepared to the important discussions in the House, on
all questions of domestic and foreign policy. As for Mr. Titmouse, he
never relished the idea of perusing and studying these troublesome and
repulsive documents--page after page, filled with long rows of figures,
tables of prices, of exchanges, &c., reports of the evidence, _verbatim
et literatim_, taken in question and answer before every committee that
sat; all sorts of expensive and troublesome "returns," moved for by any
one that chose; he rather contented himself with attending to what went
on in the House; and at the close of the session, all the documents in
question became the perquisite of his valet, who got a good round sum
for them (uncut) as waste paper.

It is not difficult to understand the pleasure which my little friend
experienced, in dispensing such favors and courtesies, as those of
orders for the gallery, and franks, to applicants for them; for all his
show of feeling it a "_bore_" to be asked. 'T was these small matters
which, as it were, brought home to him a sense of his dignity, and made
him _feel_ the possession of station and authority. I know not but that
the following application was more gratifying to him than any which he
received:--

     "T. Tag-rag's best respects to T. Titmouse, Esq. M. P., and
     begs to say how _greatly_ he will account y^e favor of obtaining
     an order to be Admitted to the Gallery of the House of Commons
     for to-morrow night, to hear the debate on the Bill for
     Doing away with the _Nuisance_ of Dustmen's cries of a morning.

     "With Mrs. T.'s and daughter's respectful comp^{ts}.

     "T. TITMOUSE, ESQ. M. P."

On receiving this, Titmouse looked out for the finest sheet of glossy
extra-superfine gilt Bath post, scented, and in a fine flourishing hand
wrote as follows:--

     Please To Admit y^e Barer To The Galery of The House of
     Commons.--T. TITMOUSE.    Wednesday, March 6^{th}. 18--."

But the reader, who must have been highly gratified by the unexpectedly
rapid progress of Mr. Titmouse in Parliamentary life, will be,
doubtless, as much interested by hearing that corresponding distinction
awaited him in the regions of science and literature; his pioneer
thither being one who had long enjoyed a very distinguishing eminence;
successfully combining the character and pursuits of scholar and
philosopher with those of a man of fashion--I mean a DOCTOR DIABOLUS
GANDER. Though upwards of sixty, he found means so effectually to
disguise his age, that he would have passed for barely forty. He had
himself so strong a predilection for dress, that the moment he saw
Titmouse he conceived a certain secret respect for that gentleman; and,
in fact, the two dressed pretty nearly in the same style. The doctor
passed for a philosopher in society. He had spent most of his days in
drilling youth in the elements of the mathematics; of which he had the
same kind and degree of knowledge that is possessed of English
literature by an old governess who has spent her life in going over the
first part of Lindley Murray's English Grammar with children. Just so
much did the doctor know of the scope, the object, the application of
the mathematics. His great distinguishing talent was, that of rendering
the most abstruse science, "_popular_;"--_i.e._ utterly unintelligible
to those who did understand science, and very exciting and entertaining
to those who did _not_. He had a knack of getting hold of obscure and
starving men of genius and science, and secretly availing himself of
their labors. He would pay them with comparative liberality to write, in
an elegant style, on subjects of pure and mixed science; but when
published, the name of _Diabolus Gander_ would appear upon the
title-page; and, to enable the doctor to do this with _some_ comfort to
his conscience, he would actually copy out the whole of the manuscript,
and make a few alterations in it. But, alas! _omne quod tetìgit
fædavit_; and it invariably happened that these were the very _maculæ_
pitched upon, exposed, and ridiculed by reviewers. No man could spread
his small stock over a larger surface than Dr. Gander; no man be more
successful in ingratiating himself with those persons so useful to an
enterprising empiric--viz. wealthy fools. He paid constant court to
Titmouse, from the first moment he saw him; and took the liberty of
calling--unasked--the very next day, at his rooms in the Albany. He soon
satisfied Titmouse that his glib visitor was a great philosopher, whom
it was an advantage and a distinction to be acquainted with. He took my
little admiring friend, for instance, to hear him deliver a lecture at
the Hanover Square Rooms, to a crowd of fine ladies and old gentlemen,
who greatly applauded all he said, upon a subject equally abstruse,
interesting, and instructive; viz. the occult qualities of _Triangles_.
In short, he was indefatigable in his attentions to Titmouse, and was a
very frequent guest at his dinner-table. He gave Titmouse, on one of
these occasions, an amazing account of the distinction accruing to a
member of any of the great learned societies; and, in fact, quite
inflamed his little imagination upon the subject--sounding him as to his
wish to become a member of some great society, in common with half the
dukes, marquises, earls, and barons in the kingdom--in particular his
own august kinsman, the Earl of Dreddlington himself.

"Why--a--'pon my soul--" quoth Titmouse, grinning, as he tossed
off his tenth glass of champagne with the bland and voluble
doctor--"I--I--shouldn't much dislike a thingumbob or two at the
end of my name--but what's the figure?"

"Certainly, I myself, as a zealous lover of science, my dear sir,
consider her honors always well bestowed on those eminent in rank and
station; though they may not have gone through the drudgery of
scientific details, sir, their countenance _irradiates_ the pale cheek
of unobtrusive science"----

"Ya--a--s, 'pon honor, it certainly does," quoth Titmouse, not exactly,
however, comprehending the doctor's fine figure of speech.

"Now, look you, Mr. Titmouse," continued the doctor, "the greatest
society in all England, out and out, is the CREDULOUS SOCIETY. I happen
to have some _leetle_ influence there, through which I have been able, I
am happy to say, to introduce several noblemen."

"Have you, by Jove?" cried Titmouse; "but what the devil do they _do_
there?"

"Do, my dear sir! They meet for the purpose of--consider the
distinguished men that are Fellows of that society! It was only the
other day that the Duke of Tadcaster told me, (the very day after I had
succeeded in getting his Grace elected,) that he was as proud of the
letters 'F. C. S,' added to his name, as he was of his dukedom!"

"By Jove!--No--but--'pon honor bright--did he? Can you get _me_ into
it?" inquired Titmouse, eagerly.

"I--oh--why--you see, my very dear sir, you're certainly rather young,"
quoth the doctor, gravely, pausing and rubbing his chin; "_if_ it could
be managed, it would be a splendid thing for you--eh?"

"By jingo, I should think so!" replied Titmouse.

"I think I've been asked by at least a dozen noblemen for my influence,
but I've not felt myself warranted"----

"Oh, well! then _in course_ there's an end of it," interrupted Titmouse,
with an air of disappointment; "and cuss me if ever I cared a pin about
it--I see I've not the ghost of a chance."

"I don't know _that_ either," replied the doctor, musingly. His design
had been all along to confer sufficient obligation on Titmouse, to
induce him to lend the doctor a sum of four or five hundred pounds to
embark in some wild scheme or other, and also to make Titmouse useful to
him for other purposes, from time to time.--"As you are so young,"
continued the doctor, "I am afraid it will be necessary in some sort of
way to give you a kind of scientific pretension--ah, by Archimedes! but
I have it!--I have it!--You see, I've a treatise in the press, and
nearly ready for publication, upon a particularly profound subject--but,
you'll understand me, explained in a perfectly popular manner--in fact,
my dear sir, it is a grand discovery of my own, which will in future
ages be placed side by side of that of Sir Isaac Newton"----

"Is _he_ a member of it too?" inquired Titmouse.

"No, my dear sir!" quoth the doctor, slightly staggered: "not bodily;
but his _spirit_ is with us! We feel it influencing all our
deliberations; though he died a quarter of a century before we were
established! But to return to the _discovery_ I was mentioning; as Sir
Isaac discovered the principle of GRAVITATION, (otherwise weight, or
heaviness,) so, Mr. Titmouse, I have discovered the principle of
LIGHTNESS!"

"You don't say so! 'Pon my life, amazing!" exclaimed Mr. Titmouse.

"And equally true, as amazing. As soon as I shall have indicated its
tendencies and results, my discovery will effect a revolution in the
existing system of physical science."

"Ah! that's what they talked about in the House last
night--_Revolution_. 'Pon my soul, I don't like revolutions
though--Folks _fight_ then--eh?" exclaimed Titmouse, uneasily.

"I am speaking of something quite different, my dear Titmouse," said Dr.
Gander, with a slight appearance of pique; "but to proceed with what I
had intended. Since I have been sitting here, my dear sir, it has
occurred to me that I have an excellent opportunity of evincing my sense
of your kindness towards me, and my appreciation of your distinguished
position--Sir, I intend to DEDICATE my work to you!"

"Sir, you're amazing kind--most uncommon polite!" quoth Titmouse, who
had not the slightest notion of what a "dedication" meant.--Within a
week or two's time, sure enough, appeared a handsome octavo volume,
beautifully printed and splendidly bound, entitled,

     "RESEARCHES into _Physical Science_, with a view to the
     Establishment of a NEW PRINCIPLE--

                              LIGHTNESS.
                                  BY
                      DIABOLUS GANDER, ESQUIRE,

    LL.D.; F. C. S.; Q. U. A. K.; G. Ö. S.; Secretary of the
    _Empirical Society_; Corresponding Member of the _Leipzic Longitude
    Society_; Vice-President of the _Peripatetic Gastronomic
    Association_; and Member of Seventeen Philosophical and Literary
    Societies in Kamschatka, Madagascar, Tartary, and Little
    Britain; &c. &c. &c."

      And it bore the following "Dedication"--

            "TO TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQUIRE, M. P.,
                        &c. &c. &c.,
              This volume is respectfully inscribed,
                    by his obedient, obliged,
                          faithful, humble servant,
                                                   DIABOLUS GANDER."

The work being vigorously pushed, and systematically puffed in all
directions, of course brought the honored name of Mr. Titmouse a good
deal before the scientific public; and about three weeks afterwards
might have been seen the following "Testimonial," suspended against the
screen of the public room of the Credulous Society, in support of Mr.
Titmouse's pretensions to be elected into it:--

     "TESTIMONIAL.--We, the undersigned, Fellows of the CREDULOUS
     SOCIETY, hereby certify that, from our personal knowledge of
     TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQUIRE, M. P., we believe him to be a
     gentleman greatly attached to credulous science, and equally
     capable and desirous of promoting its interests; and, as such,
     deserving of being elected Fellow of the Credulous Society.

               DREDDLINGTON.        FLIMSY CROTCHET.
               TANTALLAN.           DIABOLUS GANDER.
               WOODEN SPOON.        PERIWINKLE PARALLELOGRAM.
                           PLACID NOODLE."

The above distinguished names were procured by Dr. Gander, and
thereupon the election of Mr. Titmouse became almost a matter of
certainty--especially as, on the appointed day, Dr. Gander procured the
attendance of some amiable old gentlemen, Fellows of the Society, who
believed the doctor to be all he pretended to be. The above testimonial
having been read from the chair, Mr. Titmouse was balloted for, and
declared elected unanimously a Fellow of the Credulous Society. He was
prevented from attending on the ensuing meeting by a great debate, and
an expected early division: then, (I regret to say,) by sheer
intoxication; and again by his being unable to return in time from
Croydon, where he had been attending a grand prize-fight, being the
backer of one of the principal ruffians, Billy Bully, his boxing-master.
On the fourth evening, however, having dined with the Earl of
Dreddlington, he drove with his Lordship to the Society's apartments,
was formally introduced, and solemnly admitted; from which time--the
proudest moment of his life--he was entitled to have his name stand
thus:--

        "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, ESQ., M. P., F. C. S."

--And Heaven knows how much higher he might not have immediately
mounted, in the scale of social distinction, but that he came to a very
sudden rupture with his "guide, philosopher, and friend," Dr. Gander;
who, on at length venturing to make his long-meditated application to
Titmouse for a temporary loan, to enable him, Dr. Gander, to prosecute
some extensive philosophical experiments--[_i. e._, _inter nos_, on
public credulity]--was unhesitatingly refused by Titmouse; who, on being
pressed by the doctor, abused him in no very choice terms--and finally
ordered him out of the room! He quitted the presence of his ungrateful
_protégé_ with disgust, and in despair--nor without reason; for that
very night he received a propulsion towards the Fleet Prison, which
suggested to his philosophical mind several ingenious reflections
concerning the _attraction of repulsion_. There he lay for three months,
till he sent for the tyrant who had deposited him there, and who had
been his bookseller and publisher; and the doctor so dazzled him by the
outline of a certain literary speculation--to be called THE GANDER
GALLERY--that his credulous creditor relented, and set his ingenious and
enterprising debtor once more at large.

But to return to Mr. Titmouse. It was not long after his election into
the Credulous Society, that a deputation from the committee of the
Society for the _Promotion of Civil and Religious Discord_ waited upon
him at his apartments in the Albany, to solicit him, in terms the most
flattering and complimentary, to preside at their next annual meeting at
the Stonemasons' Hall: and, after some modest expressions of distrust as
to his fitness for so distinguished a post, he yielded to their anxious
entreaties. He ordered in, while they were with him, a very substantial
lunch, of which they partook with infinite relish; and having done ample
justice to his wines and spirits, the worthy gentlemen withdrew, charmed
with the intelligence and affability of their distinguished host, and
anticipating that they should have in Mr. Titmouse, "one of the most
rising young men in the Liberal line," a very effective chairman, and
who would make their meeting go off with great _éclat_. How Titmouse
would have got through the task he had undertaken, the reader must be
left to conjecture; seeing that, in point of fact, "circumstances, over
which he had no control," prevented him from fulfilling his promise. The
meeting waited for him at least three-quarters of an hour; when, finding
that neither he nor any tidings of him came, they elected some one else
into the chair, and got on as well as they could. I dare say the reader
is rather curious to know how all this came to pass; and I feel it my
duty to state the reason frankly. On the evening of the day before that
on which he had promised to preside at Stonemasons' Hall, he dined out
with one or two choice spirits; and, about two o'clock in the morning,
they all sallied forth, not a bit the _better_ for wine, in quest of
adventures. Mr. Titmouse gave some excellent imitations of donkeys,
cats, and pigs, as they walked along arm in arm; and very nearly
succeeded in tripping up an old watchman, who had crawled out to
announce the hour. Then they rang every bell they passed; and,
encouraged by impunity, proceeded to sport of a still more interesting
and exciting description--viz. twisting knockers off doors. Titmouse was
by far the most drunk of the party, and wrenched off several knockers in
a very resolute and reckless manner, placing them successively in his
pocket--where, also, his companions contrived, unknown to him, to
deposit _their_ spoils--till the weight was such as seriously to
increase the difficulty of keeping his balance. When tired of this
sport, it was agreed that they should extinguish every lamp they passed.
No sooner said than done; and Titmouse volunteered to commence. Assisted
by his companions, he clambered up a lamp-post at the corner of St.
James's Street; and holding with one hand by the bar, while his legs
clung round the iron post, with the other hand he opened the window of
the lamp; and while in the act of blowing it out, "Watch! watch!" cried
the voices of several people rushing round the corner; a rattle was
sprung; away scampered his companions in different directions; and after
holding on where he was for a moment or two, in confusion and alarm,
down slid poor Titmouse, and dropped into the arms of three accursed
watchmen, around whom was gathered a little crowd of persons, all of
whom had been roused from sleep by the pulling of their bells, and the
noise made in wrenching off their knockers. A pretty passion they all
were in, shaking their fists in the face of the captured delinquent, and
accompanying him, with menacing gestures, to the watch-house. There
having been safely lodged, he was put into a dark cell, where he
presently fell asleep; nor did he wake till he was summoned to go off to
the police-office. There he found a host of victims of his over-night's
exploits. He stoutly denied having been concerned in despoiling a single
door of its knocker--on which a breeches-maker near him furiously lifted
up the prisoner's heavy coat-tails, and exclaimed eagerly--"Your
Worship, your Worship! see, he's got his knocket full of pockers! he's
got his knocket full of pockers--see here, your Worship"----"What _do_
you mean, sir, by such gibberish?" inquired the magistrate, in so stern
a tone as drew the speaker's attention to the little transposition of
letters which he had made in his headlong haste to detect the falsehood
of the delinquent; who, finding the dismal strait to which he was
driven, and feeling really very ill, begged for mercy--which, after a
very severe rebuke, the pallid culprit being confronted by seven
knockers lying before him in a row, all of them having been taken out of
his own pockets, he obtained, on condition of his making compensation to
the injured parties, who compounded with him for twelve pounds.[5] After
paying a couple of pounds to the poor-box, he was discharged; crawled
into a coach, and, in a very sad condition, reached his rooms about one
o'clock, and got into bed in a truly deplorable state--never once
recollecting that, at that precise hour, he ought to have been taking
the chair of the meeting of the Society for the Promotion of Civil and
Religious Discord. As, however, his misfortunes were, in the newspapers,
assigned, not to "Tittlebat Titmouse," but to one "_John Smith_," the
exact state of the case never transpired to the worthy gentlemen who had
been so unaccountably deprived of his services; and who, on inquiry,
were told by his fluent valet, that Mr. Titmouse's late hours at the
House had brought on a slight and sudden attack of--jaundice; on hearing
which, they begged he might be assured of their respectful sympathy, and
hearty wishes for his restoration; and tried very hard to sound the
valet on the subject of his master's compensating for his absence by
some donation or subscription; but the fellow was very obtuse, and they
were compelled to depart disappointed.

I should have thought that the foregoing would have proved a lesson to
Mr. Titmouse, and restrained him for some time from yielding to his
cursed propensity to drink. Yet was it otherwise--and I shall tell the
matter exactly as it happened. Within a fortnight after the mischance
which I have above described, Titmouse dined with the members of a sort
of pugilistic club, which met every fortnight, for the purpose of
settling matters connected with the "ring." On the present occasion
there had been a full muster, for they had to settle the preliminaries
for a grand contest for the championship of England--to which Titmouse's
master, Mr. Billy Bully, aspired. Titmouse had scarcely ever enjoyed
himself more than on that exciting occasion; and, confident of his man,
had backed his favorite pretty freely. Towards eleven o'clock, he found
the room very close--and it was not to be wondered at, when you
considered the dreadful quantity of hard ale, harder port-wine, and
poisonous gin and water, which the little wretch had swallowed since
sitting down to dinner. About the hour I have named, however, he, Sir
Pumpkin Puppy, and one or two others, all with cigars in their mouths,
sallied forth to walk about town, in search of sport. I have hardly
patience to write it--but positively they had not proceeded half-way
down the Haymarket when they got into a downright "_row_;" and, egged on
by his companions, and especially inwardly impelled by the devil
himself, the miserable Titmouse, after grossly insulting a little
one-eyed, one-legged, bald-headed old waterman attached to the
coach-stand there, challenged him to fight, and forthwith flung away his
cigar, and threw himself into boxing attitude, amid the jeers and
laughter of the spectators--who, however, formed a sort of ring in a
trice. At it they went, _instanter_. Titmouse squared about with a sort
of disdainful showiness--in the midst of which he suddenly received a
nasty teaser on his nose and shoulder, from his active, hardy, and
experienced antagonist, which brought him to the ground, the blood
gushing from his nose in a copious stream. Sir Pumpkin quickly picked
him up, shook him, and set him fairly at his man again. Nearer and
nearer stumped the old fellow to the devoted "swell," who, evidently
groggy, squared in the most absurd way imaginable for a moment or two,
when he received his enemy's _one two_ in his eye, and on his mouth, and
again dropped down.

"He's drunk--he can't fight no more than a baby; I won't stand against
him any more," quoth the fair and stout-hearted old waterman. "It warn't
any o' my seeking; but if he thought to come it over an old cripple like
me"----

"Bravo! bravo!" cried his companions. "Come along, old chap--come
along," said one; "if I don't give you a jolly quartern, may I stick
here without a fare all this blessed night;" and the speaker led off the
victor to the public-house opposite, while Titmouse's friends led him
away, nearly insensible, to a tavern a few doors off. Having given
directions that he should be forthwith taken to a bedroom and washed,
they ordered broiled bones and mulled claret for themselves. After about
an hour and a half's nap, Titmouse, who probably had benefited rather
than suffered from his blood-letting, rejoined his friends, and called
for a cigar and a glass of cold brandy and water; having had which, they
set off homeward: he reaching his rooms about one o'clock, with a very
black eye, a swollen nose and mouth, a very thick and indistinct speech,
and unsteady step; in fact, in a much worse pickle than he had as yet
exhibited to his valet, who told him, while preparing for him a glass of
brandy and soda-water, that no fewer than five messengers had been at
his rooms. While he was yet speaking, a thundering knock was heard at
the outer-door, and on its being opened, in rushed, breathlessly, Mr.
Phelim O'Doodle.

"Titmouse!--Titmouse! Och, murther and thunder, where are ye? Where have
ye been, wid ye?" he gasped--

                 "When--a--hen--on--water--swims--
                           Too-ra-laddy--
                             Too-ra-lad-lad-lad"--

drowsily sung Titmouse--it being part of a song he had heard thrice
encored that evening after dinner--at the same time staggering towards
O'Doodle.

"Och, botheration take your too-ra-lady! Come, fait--by Jasus! clap your
hat on, and button your coat, and off to the House--immediately--or it's
all up with us, an' out we go every mother's son of us--an' the bastely
Tories'll be in. Come! come!--off wid ye, I say! I've a coach at the
door"----

"I--(hiccup)--I sha'n't--can't--'pon my life"--

"Och, off wid ye!--isn't it mad that Mr. O'Gibbet is wid ye?"----

"He's one eye--aha! and one leg--Too-ra-laddy," hiccuped the young
senator.

"Devil burn me if I don't tie ye hand an' foot together!" cried
O'Doodle, impetuously. "What the devil have ye been about wid that black
eye o' yours, and--but I'll spake about it in the coach. Off wid ye!
Isn't time worth a hundred pounds a minute?"----

Within a minute or two's time O'Doodle had got him safely into the
coach, and down to St. Stephen's they rattled at top speed. _There_ was
going on, indeed, a desperate fight--a final trial of strength between
Ministers and the Opposition, on a vote of want of confidence; and a
division expected every minute. Prodigious had been the efforts of both
parties--the whip unprecedented. Lord Bulfinch had, early in the
evening, explicitly stated that Ministers would resign unless they
gained a _majority_: and, to their infinite vexation and astonishment,
three of their stanch adherents--Titmouse being one--were missing just
at the critical moment. The Opposition had been more fortunate; every
man of theirs had come up--and they were shouting tremendously, "Divide!
divide! divide!"--while, on the other hand, Ministers were putting up
men, one after another, to speak against time, (though not one syllable
they said could be heard,) in order to get a chance of their three
missing men coming up. If none of them came, Ministers would be exactly
even with their opponents; in which case they were very much afraid that
they ought to resign. Up the stairs and into the lobby came O'Doodle,
breathlessly, with his prize.

"Och, my _dear_ O'Doodle!--Titmouse, ye little drunken divil, where have
ye been?" commenced Mr. O'Gibbet, on whom O'Doodle stumbled suddenly.

"Thank Heaven! Good God, how fortunate!" exclaimed Mr. Flummery, both he
and O'Gibbet being in a state of intense anxiety and great excitement.

"In with him!--in with him!--by Jove, they're clearing the gallery!"
gasped Mr. Flummery, while he rushed into the House, to make the way
clear for O'Doodle and O'Gibbet, who were literally carrying in Titmouse
between them.

"Sir!--Mr. Flummery!" gasped O'Doodle--"ye won't forget what I have done
to-night, will ye?"

"No, no--honor! In with you! In with you! A moment and all's lost."

They reached, however, the House in safety, Mr. O'Gibbet waving his hand
in triumph.

"Oh, ye droll little divil! where have you been hiding?" he hastily
whispered, as he deposited the insensible Titmouse on the nearest bench,
and sat beside him. Mr. O'Gibbet took off his hat, and wiped his reeking
head and face. Merciful powers! what a triumph!--and in the very nick of
time.--Titmouse had saved the Ministry! Tremendous was now the uproar in
the House, almost every one present shouting, "Divide!--divide!"

"Strangers, withdraw," cried the Speaker.

Then, _at it_ they went, with an air of tumultuous and irrepressible
excitement; but, through Titmouse, the Ministers triumphed. The numbers
were announced--

          Ayes               301
          Noes               300
                            ----
      Majority for Ministers   1

On which glorious and decisive result, there burst forth immense
cheering on the ministerial side of the House, and vehement
counter-cheering on the opposition side, which lasted for several
minutes. The noise, indeed, was so prodigious, that it almost roused
Titmouse from the sort of stupor into which he had sunk. Mr. O'Doodle
accompanied him home; and, after drinking a couple of tumblers of
whiskey and water with him, took his departure--caring nothing that he
had left Titmouse on the floor, in a state of dangerous insensibility;
from which, however, in due time he recovered, but was confined to his
bed, by a violent bilious attack, for nearly a week. Mr. O'Doodle's
services to the Government were not forgotten. A few days afterwards he
vacated his seat, having received the appointment of sub-inspector of
political caricatures in Ireland, with a salary of six hundred pounds
a-year for life. His place in the House was immediately filled up by his
brother, Mr. Trigger O'Doodle, who kept a shooting-gallery in Dublin.
Profuse were Phelim's thanks to Mr. O'Gibbet, when that gentleman
announced to him his good fortune, exclaiming, at the same time, with a
sly wink and smile--"Ye see what it is to rinder service to the
state--aha! Aisy, aisy!--softly, say I. Isn't _that_ the way to get
along?"




CHAPTER III.


The injuries which Titmouse had received in his encounter with the
waterman--I mean principally his black eye--prevented him from making
his appearance in public, or at Lord Dreddlington's, or in the House,
for several days after he had recovered from the bilious attack of which
I have spoken. His non-attendance at the House, however, signified
little, since both parties had been so thoroughly exhausted by their
late trial of strength, as to require for some time rest and quietness,
to enable them to resume the public business of the country. As soon as
his eye was fairly convalescent, the first place to which he ventured
out was his new residence in Park Lane, which having been taken for him,
under the superintendence of the Earl of Dreddlington and Mr. Gammon,
some month or two before, was now rapidly being furnished, in order to
be in readiness to receive his lady and himself, immediately after his
marriage--his Parliamentary duties not admitting of a prolonged absence
from town. The former event had, as usual, been already prematurely
announced in the newspapers several times as on the eve of taking place.
The courtship went on very easily and smoothly. Neither of them seemed
_anxious_ for the other's society, though they contrived to evince, in
the presence of others, a decent degree of gratification at meeting each
other. He did all which he was instructed it was necessary for a man of
fashion to do. He attended her and the earl to the opera repeatedly, as
also to other places of fashionable resort: he had danced with her
occasionally; but, to tell the truth, it was only at the vehement
instance of the earl her father, that she ever consented to stand up
with one whose person, whose carriage, whose motions were so unutterably
vulgar and ridiculous as those of Mr. Titmouse, who was yet her
affianced husband. He had made her several times rather expensive
presents of jewelry, and would have purchased for her a great stock of
clothing, (of which he justly considered himself an excellent judge,) if
she would have permitted it. He had, moreover, been a constant guest at
the earl's table, where he was under greater restraint than anywhere
else. Of such indiscretions and eccentricities as I have just been
recording, they knew, or were properly _supposed_ to know, nothing. 'T
was not for them to have their eyes upon him while sowing his wild
oats--so thought the earl; who, however, had frequent occasion for
congratulating himself in respect of Mr. Titmouse's political celebrity,
and also of the marks of distinction conferred upon him in the literary
and scientific world, of which the earl was himself so distinguished an
ornament. Titmouse had presented copies, gorgeously bound, of Dr.
Gander's Treatise on Lightness, both to the earl and the Lady Cecilia;
and the very flattering _dedication_ to Titmouse, by Dr. Gander, really
operated not a little in his favor with his future lady. What effect
might have been produced upon her Ladyship, had she been apprised of the
fact, that the aforesaid dedication had appeared in only a hundred
copies, having been cancelled directly Dr. Gander had ascertained the
futility of his expectations from Titmouse, I do not know; but I believe
she never was informed of that circumstance. As far as his dress went,
she had contrived, through the interference of the earl and of Mr.
Gammon, (for whom she had conceived a singular respect,) to abate a
_little_ of its fantastic absurdity, its execrable vulgarity. Nothing,
however, seemed capable of effecting any material change in _the man_,
although his continued intercourse with refined society could hardly
fail to produce _some_ advantageous alteration in his _manners_. As for
anything further, Tittlebat Titmouse remained the same vulgar,
heartless, presumptuous, ignorant creature he had ever been. Though I
perceive in the Lady Cecilia no qualities to excite our respect or
affection, I pity her from my very soul when I contemplate her coming
union with Titmouse. One thing I know, that as soon as ever she had
bound herself irrevocably to him, she began to think of at least fifty
men whom she had ever spurned, but whom _now_ she would have welcomed
with all the ardor and affection of which her cold nature was
susceptible. As she had never been _conspicuous_ for animation,
vivacity, or energy, the gloom which more and more frequently
overshadowed her, whenever her thoughts turned towards Titmouse,
attracted scarce any one's attention. There _were_ those, however, who
could have spoken of her mental disquietude at the approach of her
cheerless nuptials--I mean her maid Annette and Miss Macspleuchan. To
say that she _loathed_ the bare idea of her union with Titmouse--of his
person, manners, and character--would not perhaps be exactly correct,
since she had not the requisite strength of character; but she
contemplated her future lord with mingled feelings of apprehension,
dislike, and disgust. She generally fled for support to the comfortable
notion of "_fate_," which had assigned her such a husband. Heaven had
denied poor Lady Cecilia all power of contemplating the future; of
anticipating consequences; of _reflecting_ upon the step she was about
to take. Miss Macspleuchan, however, did so for her; but, being placed
in a situation of great delicacy and difficulty, acted with cautious
reserve whenever the subject was mentioned. Lady Cecilia had not
vouchsafed to consult her before her Ladyship had finally committed
herself to Titmouse; and, after that, interference was useless and
unwarrantable.

Lady Cecilia late one afternoon entered her dressing-room pale and
dispirited, as had been latterly her wont; and, with a deep sigh, sank
into her easy-chair. Annette, on her Ladyship's entrance, was leaning
against the window frame, reading a book, which she immediately closed
and laid down. "What are you reading there?" inquired Lady Cecilia,
languidly.

"Oh, nothing particular, my Lady!" replied Annette, coloring a little;
"it was only the prayer-book. I was looking at the marriage-service, my
Lady. I wanted to see what it was that your Ladyship has to say"----

"It's not very amusing, Annette. _I_ think it very dull and stupid--and
you might have been better employed!"

"La, my Lady--now _I_ should have thought it quite interesting, if _I_
had been in your La'ship's situation!"

"Well, what is it that they expect me to repeat?"

"Oh! I'll read it, my Lady--here it is," replied Annette, and read as
follows:--

     "_Then shall the priest say unto the woman_, 'N, wilt thou have
     this man to be thy wedded husband, to live together, after God's
     ordinance, in the holy state of matrimony? Wilt thou obey
     him, serve him, love, honor, and keep him, in sickness and in
     health, and, forsaking all other, keep thee only unto him, so
     long as ye both shall live?'

     "_The woman shall answer_, 'I will.'"

"Well--it's only a form, you know, Annette--and I dare say no one ever
gives it a thought," said Lady Cecilia, struggling to suppress a sigh.

"Then," continued Annette, "your La'ship will have to say a good deal
after the parson--but I beg your La'ship's pardon--it's (in your case)
the bishop. Here it is:

     "'I, N, take thee, M, to be my wedded husband, to have and
     to hold, from this day forward, for better for worse, for richer
     for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love, cherish'"----

"Yes, yes--I hear," interrupted Lady Cecilia, faintly, turning pale; "I
know it all; that will do, Annette"--

"There's only a word more, my Lady:--

     "'And obey, till death us do part, according to God's holy
     ordinance; and thereto I give thee my troth.'

"All this your La'ship says, with your right hand holding Mr.
Titmouse's."

Here a visible tremor passed through Lady Cecilia. "You may leave me
alone, Annette, a little while," said she; "I don't feel quite well."

"La, my Lady, a'n't your La'ship _late_, already? Your La'ship knows how
early her Grace dines ever since her illness."

"There's plenty of time; I'll ring for you when I want you.
And--stay--you may as well leave your prayer-book with me for a
moment--it will amuse me to look in it." Annette did as she was bid; and
the next moment her melancholy mistress was alone. She did not, however,
open the book she had asked for, but fell into a revery, which was
disturbed some time afterwards, only by her maid tapping at the door;
and who, on entering, told her that she had not one moment to lose; that
his Lordship had been dressed for some time. On this her Ladyship rose,
and commenced her toilet with a very deep sigh.

"Your La'ship, I suppose, wears your gold-colored satin? it matches so
well with the pearls," said Annette, going to the jewel-case.

"I sha'n't wear any pearls to-day."

"Oh! my Lady! not that beautiful spray of Mr. Titmouse's? Your La'ship
does look so well in it!"

"I sha'n't wear anything of Mr. Tit--I mean," she added, coloring, "I
sha'n't wear _anything_ in my hair to-day!"

Many and anxious, it may be easily believed, had been the conferences
and negotiations between the earl, Mr. Gammon, and Mr. Titmouse, with
reference to the state of his property, and the settlement to be made on
Lady Cecilia. It appeared that the extent of the encumbrances on the
Yatton property was £35,000, and which Gammon had many ways of
accounting for, without disclosing the amount of plunder which had
fallen to the share of the firm--or rather to the senior partner. The
interest on this sum (viz. £1,750) would reduce Mr. Titmouse's present
income to £8,250 per annum; but Gammon pledged himself that the rental
of the estates could, with the greatest ease, be raised to £12,000, and
that measures, in fact, were already in progress to effect so desirable
a result. Then there was a sum of £20,000 due to Mr. Titmouse from Mr.
Aubrey, on account of the mesne profits, £10,000 of which was guaranteed
by Lord De la Zouch, and would very shortly become payable with
interest; and the remaining £10,000 could be at any time called in. The
sum finally determined upon, as a settlement upon Lady Cecilia, was
£3,000 a-year--surely a very substantial "_consideration_" for the
"faithful _promise_" to be, by-and-by, made by her at the altar--and
which, moreover, she conceived she had a prospect of having entirely to
herself--really "for her _separate_ use, exempt from the control, debts,
and engagements of her said intended husband." I am sorry to say that
Lady Cecilia clung to the prospect of an almost immediate _separation_;
which, she learned from several confidential friends, some of whom were
qualified, by personal experience, to offer an opinion, was a very easy
matter, becoming daily more frequent on the ground of incompatibility of
temper. A faint hint of the kind which she had once dropped to Miss
Macspleuchan, was received in such a manner as prevented Lady Cecilia
from ever repeating it. As for the earl, her father, I cannot say that
he did not observe a depression of spirits in his daughter, increasing
with the increasing proximity of her marriage. Since, however, _he_ had
entirely reconciled _himself_ to it--and was delighted at the
approaching long-coveted reunion of the family interests--he did not
think of _her_ having any real objection to the arrangements. As for her
lowness of spirits, and nervousness, doubtless--his Lordship
considered--every woman on the point of being married, experienced
similar feelings. She herself, indeed, seldom if ever named the matter
to her father in such a way as to occasion him uneasiness. In short, the
affair seemed to be going on just as it ought to do; and even had it
assumed an untoward aspect, circumstances had arisen which would have
prevented the earl from giving his wonted attention to what in any
degree concerned his daughter. In the first place, on his Lordship's
party coming into power, to his infinite amazement his old post of Lord
High Steward was filled up by some one else! So also was the office of
Lord President of the Council; and so, moreover, was every other
official post; and that, too, without any apology to the offended peer,
or explanation of such a phenomenon as his entire exclusion from office.
The Premier had, in fact, never once thought of his Lordship while
forming his administration; and on being subsequently remonstrated with
by a venerable peer, a common friend of the Premier and Lord
Dreddlington, the Premier very calmly and blandly expressed his regret
that Lord Dreddlington had not given him notice of his being
still--"even in his advanced years"--disposed to hold office; and
trusted that he should yet be able, and before any long time should have
elapsed, to avail himself of the very valuable services "of my Lord
Dreddlington." This was all that he could get from the courteous but
marble-hearted Premier; and, for a long while, the earl could think of
only one mode of soothing his wounded feelings--viz. going about to his
friends, and demonstrating that the new Lord Steward and the new Lord
President were every day displaying their unfitness for office; and that
the only error committed by the Premier, in the difficult and
responsible task of forming a government, was that of selecting two such
individuals as he had appointed to those distinguished posts. He was
also greatly comforted and supported, at this period of vexation and
disappointment, by the manly and indignant sympathy of--Mr. Gammon, who
had succeeded in gaining a prodigious ascendency over the earl, who, on
the sudden death of his own solicitor, old Mr. Pounce, adopted Gammon in
his stead; and infinitely rejoiced his Lordship was, to have thus
secured the services of one who possessed an intellect at once so
practical, masterly, and energetic; who had formed so high an estimate
of his Lordship's powers; and whom his Lordship's condescending
familiarity never for one moment caused to lose sight of the vast
distance and difference between them. He appeared, moreover, to act
between Titmouse and the earl with the scrupulous candor and fidelity of
a high-minded person, consciously placed in a situation of peculiar
delicacy and responsibility. At the least, he seemed exceedingly anxious
to secure Lady Cecilia's interests; and varied--or _appeared_ to
vary--the arrangements, according to every suggestion of his Lordship.
The earl was satisfied that Gammon was disposed to make Titmouse go much
farther than of his own accord he would have felt disposed to go,
towards meeting the earl's wishes in the matter of the settlements;--in
fact, Gammon evinced, in the earl's opinion, great anxiety to place her
Ladyship in that position to which her high pretensions so justly
entitled her.

But this was not the only mode by which he augmented and secured his
influence over the weak old peer. Not only had Gammon, in the manner
pointed out in a previous portion of this history, diminished the drain
upon his Lordship's income, which had so long existed in the shape of
interest upon money lent him on mortgage, (and which embarrassments, by
the way, had all arisen from his foolish state and extravagance when
Lord High Steward;) not only, I say, had Gammon done all this, but
infinitely more;--he had enabled his Lordship, as it were, "to strike a
blow in a new hemisphere," and at once evince his fitness for the
conduct of important and complicated affairs of business, acquire an
indefinite augmentation of fortune, and also great influence and
popularity.

England, about the time I am speaking of, was smitten with a sort of
mercantile madness--which showed itself in the shape of a monstrous
passion for JOINT-STOCK COMPANIES. John Bull all of a sudden took it
into his head, that no commercial undertaking of the least importance
could any longer be carried on by means of _individual_ energy, capital,
and enterprise. A glimmering of this great truth he discovered that he
had had, from the first moment that a private _partnership_ had been
adopted; and it was only to follow out the principle--to convert a
private into a public partnership, and call it a "Joint-stock Company."
This bright idea of John's produced prompt and prodigious results--a
hundred _joint stock companies_

        "Rose like an exhalation,"

in the metropolis alone, within one twelvemonth's time. But then came
the question, _upon what_ were these grand combined forces to operate?
Undertakings of commensurate magnitude must be projected--and so it was.
It really mattered not a straw how wild and ludicrously impracticable
was a project--it had but to be started, and announced, to call forth
moneyed people among all classes, all _making haste to be rich_--and
ready to back the speculation, even to the last penny they had in the
world; pouring out their capital with a recklessness, of which the
lamentable _results_ may prevent their recurrence. Any voluble visionary
who was unluckily able to reach the ear of one or two persons in the
city, could expand his crotchet into a "company" with as little effort
as an idiot could blow out a soap-bubble. For instance: one wiseacre
(who surely ought never to have been at large) conceived a plan for
creating ARTIFICIAL RAIN at an hour's notice, over any extent of country
short of a circle of three miles in diameter; a second, for conveying
MILK to every house in the metropolis in the same way as water is at
present conveyed--viz. by pipes, supplied by an immense reservoir of
milk to be established at Islington, and into which a million of cows
were to be milked night and morning; a third, for converting _saw-dust
into solid wood_; and a fourth, for surrounding the metropolis with a
wall twenty feet in thickness, and fifty in height. Within three days of
each of these hopeful speculations being announced, there were as many
completely organized joint-stock companies established to carry them
into effect. Superb offices were engaged in the city; Patrons,
Presidents, Vice-Presidents; Trustees, Chairmen, Directors; Secretaries,
Actuaries, Architects, Auditors; Bankers, Standing Counsel, Engineers,
Surveyors, and Solicitors, appointed: and the names of all these
functionaries forthwith blazed in dazzling array at the head of a
"Prospectus," which set forth the advantages of the undertaking with
such seductive eloquence as no man could resist; and within a week's
time there was not a share to be had in the market. Into affairs of this
description, Mr. Gammon, who soon saw the profit to be made out of them,
if skilfully worked, plunged with the energy and excitement of a
gamester. He drew in Mr. Quirk after him; and, as they could together
command the ears of several enterprising capitalists in the city, they
soon had their hands full of business, and launched two or three very
brilliant speculations. Mr. Gammon himself drew up their
"_Prospectuses_," and in a style which must have tempted the very devil
himself (had he seen them) into venturing half his capital in the
undertaking!--One was a scheme for providing the metropolis with a
constant supply of salt water by means of a canal cut from the vicinity
of the Nore, and carried nearly all round London, so as to afford the
citizens throughout the year the luxury of sea-bathing. Another was of a
still more extraordinary and interesting description--for carrying into
effect a discovery, by means of which, ships of all kinds and sizes
could be furnished with the means, by one and the same process--and that
remarkably simple, cheap, and convenient--of obtaining _pure fresh
water_ from the SEA, and converting the salt or brine thrown off in the
operation, _instanter_ into _gunpowder_! The reality of this amazing
discovery was decisively ascertained by three of the greatest chemists
in England; a patent was taken out, and a company formed for immediately
working the patent. This undertaking was the first that Gammon brought
under the notice of the Earl of Dreddlington, whom he so completely
dazzled by his description, both of the signal service to be conferred
upon the country, and the princely revenue to be derived from it to
those early entering into the speculation, that his Lordship intimated
rather an anxious wish to be connected with it.

"Good gracious, sir!" said his Lordship, with an air of wonder--"to what
a pitch is science advancing! When will human ingenuity end? Sir, I
doubt not that one of these days _everything_ will be found out!"

"Certainly--I feel the full force of your Lordship's very striking
observation," replied Gammon, who had listened to him with an air of
delighted deference.

"Sir, this is a truly astonishing discovery! Yet, I give you my honor,
sir, I have often thought that something of the kind was very desirable,
as far as the obtaining fresh water from salt water was concerned, and
have wondered whether it could ever be practicable: but I protest the
latter part of the discovery--the conversion of the brine into
gunpowder--is--is--sir, I say it is--astounding; it is more; it is very
interesting, in a picturesque, and important in a patriotic point of
view. Only think, sir, of our vessels gathering gunpowder and fresh
water from the sea they are sailing over. Sir, the discoverer deserves a
subsidy! This must in due time be brought before Parliament." His
Lordship got quite excited; and Gammon, watching his opportunity,
intimated the pride and pleasure it would give him to make his Lordship
the patron of the gigantic undertaking in question.

"Sir--sir--you do me--infinite honor," quoth the earl, quite flustered
by the suddenness of the proposal.

"As there will be, of course, your Lordship sees, several great
capitalists concerned, I must, for form's sake, consult them before any
step is taken; but I flatter myself, my Lord, that there can be but one
opinion, when I name to them the possibility of our being honored with
your Lordship's name and influence."

The earl listened to this with a stately bow and a gratified smile; and
on the ensuing day received a formal communication from Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, soliciting his Lordship to become the patron of the
undertaking--which he most graciously acceded to; and was easily
prevailed upon to secure several other highly distinguished names among
his friends, who were profoundly ignorant of _business_, in all its
departments, but delighted to figure before the public, as the patrons
of so great and laudable an enterprise. Out went forthwith, all over the
country, the advertisements and prospectuses of the new company, and
which could boast such commanding names as cast most of its sister
companies into the shade--_e. g._ "The Right Honorable the EARL of
DREDDLINGTON, G.C.B., F.C.S., F.P.S., &c. &c."--"The Most Noble the DUKE
of TANTALLAN, K.T., &c. &c."--"The Most Honorable the MARQUIS of
MARMALADE, &c. &c. &c." The capital to be one million, in ten thousand
shares of one hundred pounds each. Lord Dreddlington was presented with
a hundred shares, as a mark of respect and gratitude from the leading
shareholders; moreover, his Lordship took two hundred shares besides,
and prevailed on various of his friends to do the same. In less than
three weeks' time the shares had risen to £40 premium--[_i.e._ my lady
readers will understand, each share for which his Lordship was supposed
to have given, or to be liable to be called upon for £100, he could at
any moment dispose of for £140]--and then Mr. Gammon so represented
matters to his Lordship, as to induce him to part with his shares, which
he found no difficulty in doing--and thereby realized a clear profit of
£12,000. This seemed to the earl rather the effect of magic than of an
everyday mercantile adventure. His respect for Gammon rose with
everything he heard of that gentleman, or saw him do; and his Lordship
allowed himself to be implicitly guided by him in all things. Under his
advice, accordingly, the earl became interested in several other similar
speculations, which so occupied his thoughts as almost to obliterate his
sense of ministerial injustice. Several of his friends cautioned him,
now and then, against committing himself to such novel and extensive
speculations, in which he might incur, he was reminded, dangerous
liabilities; but his magnificent reception of such interference, soon
caused their discontinuance. The earl felt himself safe in the hands of
Mr. Gammon, forming an equal and a very high estimate of his ability and
integrity.

His Lordship's attention having been thus directed to such matters--to
the mercantile interests of this great country--he soon began to take a
vast interest in the discussion of such subjects in the House, greatly
to the surprise and edification of many of his brother peers. Absorbing,
however, as were these and similar occupations, they were almost
altogether suspended as soon as a day--and that not a distant one--had
been fixed upon for the marriage of the Lady Cecilia with Mr. Titmouse.
From that moment, the old man could scarcely bear her out of his
presence; following and watching all her movements with a peculiar,
though still a stately, solicitude and tenderness. Frequent, earnest,
and dignified, were his interviews with Titmouse--his representations as
to the invaluable treasure that was about to be intrusted to him in the
Lady Cecilia--the last direct representative of the most ancient noble
family in the kingdom. Innumerable were his Lordship's directions to him
concerning his future conduct, both in public and private life;
intimating, in a manner at once impressive and affectionate, that the
eyes of the country would be thenceforward fixed upon him, as son-in-law
of the Earl of Dreddlington. His Lordship, moreover--pocketing the
affront he had received at the hands of the Ministry--made a very
strenuous and nearly a successful effort to procure for his destined
son-in-law a vacant lordship of the Treasury. The Premier was really
beginning to consider the subject, when Mr. O'Gibbet extinguished all
the aspiring hopes of poor Lord Dreddlington, by applying for the vacant
office for Mr. Och Hubbaboo, an early friend of Mr. O'Gibbet; and who
having failed in business, and been unable to re-establish himself, had
come into the House of Commons to repair his shattered fortunes. I need
hardly say, that within a day or two, Mr. Hubbaboo was made a lord of
the Treasury; and thereby were very nearly alienated from Ministers two
stanch and enlightened supporters--to wit, the Earl of Dreddlington and
Mr. Titmouse.

Early in the forenoon of Tuesday the 1st of April 18--, there were
indications in the neighborhood of Lord Dreddlington's house in
Grosvenor Square, that an aristocratic wedding was about to be
celebrated. Lady Cecilia's bridemaids, and one or two other ladies, the
Duke and Duchess of Tantallan, and a few other persons of distinction,
who were to accompany the party to church, made their appearance about
eleven o'clock; and shortly afterwards dashed up Mr. Titmouse's cab, in
which sat that gentleman, enveloped in a magnificent green cloak,
designed to conceal from vulgar observation the full splendor of his
personal appearance. He had been engaged at his toilet since five
o'clock that morning; and the results were not unworthy of the pains
which had been taken to secure them. He wore a light-blue body coat,
with velvet collar; tight black pantaloons tying round his ankles;
gossamer white silk stockings, and dress-shoes, with small gold buckles.
His shirt was of snowy whiteness, and there glittered in the centre of
it a very superb diamond brooch. He had two waistcoats, the under one a
sky-blue satin, (only the roll visible,) the outer one of white satin,
richly embroidered. A burnished gold guard-chain was disposed very
gracefully over the exterior of his outer waistcoat. His hair was parted
down the middle, and curled forward towards each temple, giving his
countenance a very bold and striking expression. He wore white kid
gloves, a glossy new hat, and held in his hand his agate-headed ebony
cane. Though he tried to look at his ease, his face was rather pale, and
his manner a little flurried. As for the bride--she had slept scarcely a
quarter of an hour the whole night; and a glimpse at her countenance, in
the glass, convinced her of the necessity of yielding to Annette's
suggestions, and rouging a little. Her eyes told of the sleepless and
agitated night she had passed; and while dressing, she was twice forced
to drink a little sal volatile and water. She was cold, and trembled.
When at length she had completed her toilet, what a figure did her glass
present to her! The dress--rich white satin--a long and beautiful blonde
lace veil--and a delicate wreath of orange blossoms, was that of a
bride, certainly; but was the haggard countenance that of a bride? Miss
Macspleuchan burst into tears at the sight. When, attended by her
bridemaids and Miss Macspleuchan, she made her appearance in the
drawing-room, the Earl of Dreddlington approached her, and saluted her
with silent tenderness. Then Titmouse came up, very pale, but with a
would-be familiar air--"Hope you're quite well, dearest, this happy
day," said he, and kissed her gloved hand. She made him no reply;
stepped back, and sank upon the sofa; and presently the carriages were
announced to be in readiness. The earl led her down, followed by her two
bridemaids, and entered the first carriage, which then drove off to St.
George's Church; Titmouse and the rest of the party immediately
following. The ceremony was to be performed by the Bishop of Barnard
Castle, an old friend, and indeed a distant relation of Lord
Dreddlington's. Methinks I now see his portly and commanding figure,
standing at the altar, with the little distinguished party before him;
and hear his clear, sonorous voice reading the marriage-service.
Titmouse was pale and flushed by turns, and looked frightened--behaving,
however, with more sedateness than I should have expected. Lady Cecilia
leaned, when she could, against the rails; and repeated her few allotted
words in a voice scarcely audible. When Titmouse fixed the ring upon her
finger, she trembled and shed tears--averting her face from him, and at
length concealing it entirely in her pocket-handkerchief. She looked,
indeed, the image of misery. The Earl of Dreddlington maintained a
countenance of rigid solemnity. At length the all-important ceremony
came to a close; the necessary entries and signatures were made in the
vestry, to which the wedding party followed the bishop; and then Mr.
Titmouse, taking HIS WIFE'S arm within his own, led her out to the
private door, where stood waiting for them the earl's chariot. He handed
her into it, and popped in after her--a little crowd standing round to
catch a glimpse of the distinguished bride and bridegroom; and they
drove rapidly homeward. He sat in one corner, and she in the other; each
so occupied with their own thoughts, that they uttered scarcely two
words all the way.

A splendid _déjeuner à la fourchette_ was prepared, and a very brilliant
party attended to pay their respects to the bride and bridegroom, and
the Earl of Dreddlington; and about two o'clock the Lady Cecilia
withdrew to prepare for her journey, which was to Poppleton Hall, her
father's residence in Hertfordshire, where they were to spend their
honeymoon. She had never shown so much emotion in her life as when she
parted with Miss Macspleuchan and her bridemaids--being several times on
the verge of hysterics. Mr. Titmouse's travelling-chariot--a dashing
chocolate-colored one, with four horses--stood at the door, her
Ladyship's maid and his valet seated in the rumble. Some hundred people
stood round to see the

          "Happy, happy, happy pair,"

set off on their journey of happiness. The earl led down Lady Cecilia,
followed by Titmouse, who had exchanged his hat for a gaudy
travelling-cap, with a gold band round it! Lady Cecilia, with drooping
head and feeble step, suffered the earl, whom she kissed fervently, to
place her in the chariot, when she burst into a flood of tears.
Then Mr. Titmouse shook hands cordially with his distinguished
father-in-law--popped into the chariot--the steps were doubled
up--the door closed--the side-blinds were drawn down by Mr. Titmouse;
"All's right!" cried one of the servants, and away rolled the
carriage-and-four, which, quickening its speed, was soon out of sight.
Lady Cecilia remained in a sort of stupor for some time, and sat silent
and motionless in the corner of the chariot; but Titmouse had now become
lively enough, having had the benefit of some dozen glasses of
champagne.

"Ah, my lovely gal--dearest gal of my heart!" he exclaimed fondly, at
the same time kissing her cold cheeks, and putting his arm round her
waist--"Now you're all my own! 'pon my soul, isn't it funny, though?
We're man and wife! By Jove, I never loved you so much as now, ducky!
eh?" Again he pressed his lips to her cold cheek.

"Don't, don't, I beg," said she, faintly, "I'm not well;" and she feebly
tried to disengage herself from his rude and boisterous embrace: while
her drooping head and ashy cheek fully corroborated the truth of her
statement. In this state she continued for the whole of the first stage.
When they stopped to change horses, says Titmouse, starting up--having
very nearly dropped asleep--"Cicely, as you're so uncommon ill, hadn't
you better have your maid in, and I'll sit on the box?--it would be a
devilish deal more comfortable for you--eh?"

"Oh, I should feel _so_ obliged if you would, Mr. Titmouse!" she replied
faintly. It was done as she wished. Titmouse enveloped himself in his
cloak; and, having lit a cigar, mounted the box, and smoked all the way
till they reached the Hall!

Gammon was one of those who had seen them set off on their auspicious
journey. He contemplated them with deep interest and anxiety.

"Well," he exclaimed, walking away, with a deep sigh, when the carriage
had got out of sight--"So far, _so good_: Heavens! the plot thickens,
and the game is bold!"

Were you, oh unhappy Lady Cecilia! in entering into this ill-omened
union, to be more pitied or despised? 'T was, alas! most _deliberately_
done; in fact, we have already had laid before us ample means of
determining the question--but 't is a delicate and painful one, and had
perhaps be better left alone.

They spent about a fortnight at Poppleton Hall, and then went on to
Yatton; and if the reader be at all curious to know how MR. AND LADY
CECILIA TITMOUSE commenced their matrimonial career, I am able, in some
measure, to gratify him, by the sight of a letter addressed by the Lady
Cecilia, some time afterwards, to one of her confidential friends. 'T is
melancholy enough, with, in addition, all the feebleness and dulness
which might have been expected from one of her Ladyship's temperament
and capacity; yet, methinks, may it suggest topics of instructive
reflection.

                                            "YATTON, _28th April 18--_.

     "DEAR BLANCHE--

     ... "Fate should have something pleasant in store for me, since it
     has made me most unhappy now, but it is some consolation that I
     took this step purely to please my papa, who seemed to think that
     it was a thing that _ought_ to be done: You know he always fretted
     himself greatly about the division of the family interests, and so
     on; and when he proposed to me this truly unhappy alliance, _I_
     supposed it was my duty to comply, as indeed he said it was. I am
     sure but for this I should never have dreamed of such a thing as
     doing what I did, for if, by the way, fate chose us to come
     together, it ought surely to have fitted us to each other; but
     really, dear Blanche, (_entre nous_) you cannot _think_ what a
     _creature it is_. He is always smoking cigars, &c., and he by that
     means not only carries the nasty odor of the smoke about him
     everywhere, but also in spite of all I can do, when we come
     together in the carriage (which is not often) and at meals, he
     communicates the odious smell to my clothes--and Annette wastes a
     fortune in eau-de-cologne to scatter over my dresses and her own
     too, and he has very nasty habits besides, namely, picking his
     teeth, (often at dinner,) eating with his knife, &c. &c., and he is
     continually running his fingers through his horrid hair, to curl
     it, and carries a comb with him, and several times has combed his
     hair in the carriage just before we got out at the door of the
     place we were to dine at, and he always takes too much wine, and
     comes up the very last to the drawing-room, and sometimes in _such
     a state_. I am resolved I will never come home with him from dinner
     again, even if I ever go out together with him. I do believe the
     wretch has been guilty of some impudence to Annette, for the girl
     always colors when I mention his name, and looks confused and
     angry, but of course I cannot ask her. And he is such a horrid
     _liar_ there is no believing a word he says, he is always saying
     that he might if he had chosen marry Lady This and Lady That, and
     says Miss Aubrey was dying to have him (I wish, dear B., she _had_,
     instead of myself, she would have been welcome for me, to return
     and become mistress of Yatton again)--by the way, it certainly is a
     truly delightful spot, quite old-fashioned and all that and
     delightful grounds about it, but it seems like a nunnery to me, I
     am so unhappy and no one seems anxious to come to see me, though
     there are the ----'s, and the ----'s, and ----'s within an hour or
     two's drive of us, but how can you wonder? for if you only saw the
     sort of people that come here, such horrid wretches, a Unitarian
     parson and his vulgar wife and daughter and a low apothecary and
     auctioneer and so on, which he says is necessary (forsooth) to keep
     up his interest in the borough. Then he goes on in such a shameful
     and unfeeling and disrespectful way before the vicar (Dr. Tatham, a
     very nice person, who I am sure, by his looks, _feels for me_) that
     Dr. T. will scarcely ever come near us under one pretence or
     another. I am sorry to tell you Mr. Titmouse has no more _sense of
     religion_ than a cat or a dog, and I understand he has left a great
     many of his election bills unpaid (so that he is very unpopular)
     and positively, dear Blanche! the diamond spray the creature bought
     me turns out to be only _paste_!! He never goes to church, and has
     got up one or two dog-fights in the village, and he is hated by the
     tenants, for he is always raising their rents. I forgot to mention
     by the way he had the monstrous assurance one morning to _open my
     letters_!--and said he had a right to do so, with his own wife, for
     we were one (I hate to write it) so I have had a letter-bag of my
     own which is always delivered into my own room. Oh Heavens! the
     idea of his succeeding to the barony! but to be sure you have no
     notion how hard he lives; (and _entre nous_ the other day the
     doctor was called in to him and had to put leeches on his head, and
     certainly (_entre nous, dearest_ B.,) I understand such things
     sometimes do often lead to very _sad results_, but however he
     certainly does seem better now.) My papa knows nothing of all this
     yet, but he soon must, and I am confident a _separation_ must
     ensue, or I shall die, or go mad. Oh how thankful I should be!...
     But I could fill two or three sheets more in this way, and yet I
     have not told you a hundredth part of his _gaucheries_, but really
     you must be quite sick of hearing of them. If he will but leave me
     here when he goes up to town, you will surely pay me your promised
     visit--and I will tell you many more miserable things. In the mean
     while, oh dearest B., how I envy you being single, and wish I were
     so again!--_Be sure_ you burn this when you have read it--and
     believe me, your unhappy,

                                                               "CECILIA.

     "P. S. Of course I shall not ask him for one of his ridiculous
     franks, I never do; and as your brother is not with you, you must
     not grumble at paying the postage of this long letter.

     "THE LADY BLANCHE LEWISHAM."

A dull and phlegmatic disposition, like that of Lady Cecilia, must have
been roused and stung indeed, before she could have attained to such
bitterness of expression as is occasionally to be met with in the above
communication. Though it shadows forth, with painful distinctness,
several of the more disadvantageous features of Mr. Titmouse's character
and conduct, there were far darker ones, with which its miserable writer
had not then become acquainted. I shall but hastily glance at one of
them; viz. that he was at that moment keeping a mistress in town, and
commencing the seduction of a farmer's daughter in the neighborhood of
Yatton! Execrable little miscreant!--why should I defile my paper by
further specifying his gross misdeeds, or dwelling upon their sickening
effects on the mind and feelings of the weak woman, who could suffer
herself to be betrayed into such a monstrous union?--But is she the only
one that has done so?

Whatever may be the accidental and ultimate advantages, in respect of
fortune or social station, expected to be realized by woman in forming a
union with one who would be otherwise regarded with indifference, or
dislike, or disgust, she may rely upon it that she is committing an act
of deliberate _wickedness_, which will be attended, probably, for the
rest of her life, with consequences of unutterable and inevitable
misery, which even the obtaining of her proposed objects will not
compensate, but only enhance. It is equally a principle of our law, and
of common sense, that people must be understood to have _contemplated_
the natural and necessary consequences of their own acts, even if
hastily--but by so much the more if deliberately done. When, therefore,
they come to experience those consequences, _let them not complain_. A
marriage of this description, is, so to speak, utter dislocation and
destruction to the delicate and beautiful fabric of a woman's character.
It perverts, it _deflects_ the noblest tendencies of her lovely nature;
it utterly degrades and corrupts her; she sinks irretrievably into an
inferior being: instead of her native simplicity and purity, are to be
seen thenceforth only heartlessness and hypocrisy. Her affections and
passions, denied their legitimate objects and outlets, according to
their original weakness or strength of development, either disappear and
wither--and she is no longer WOMAN--or impel her headlong into coarse
sensuality, perhaps at length open criminality; and then she is expelled
indignantly and forever from the community of her sex. 'T is then,
indeed, an angel turned into a FIEND!--Remember, remember, oh woman!
that it is not the mere ring, and the orange blossom, which constitute
the difference between VIRTUE--and VICE!----

Had Lady Cecilia been a woman of acute perceptions or lively
sensibilities, she must have fled from her sufferings--she must have
gone mad, or committed suicide. As it was, dull as was her temperament,
when the more odious points of Titmouse's character and habits were
forced upon her notice by the close and constant contiguity of daily
intercourse, the reflection that such must be the case _for the
remainder of their lives_, became hourly more intolerable, and roused
into existence feelings of active hatred and disgust; she became every
moment even more alive to the real horrors of her position. The slender
stay she had sought for in the reflection that she had incurred all by a
dutiful submission to her father's wishes, quickly gave way; _she knew
that it was false_! As for Titmouse, he had never cared one straw about
anything beyond becoming the husband of the future Baroness of
Drelincourt--and that on account not merely of the dignity and splendor
conferred upon him by such an alliance with the last remaining member of
the elder branch of his ancient family, but also because of the grave
and repeated assurances of Mr. Gammon, that it was in some mysterious
way essential to the tenure of his own position. Had, however, Lady
Cecilia, instead of being cold and inanimate, haughty even to repulsion
in her manner, and of person lean and uninviting--been of fascinating
manners, affectionate disposition, of brilliant accomplishments, and of
ripe loveliness of person, it would, I am persuaded, have made little or
no difference to Mr. Titmouse; since such a radiant being would, as it
were, stand always surrounded by the invisible but impassable barrier of
_refinement_--forever forbidding communion and sympathy. As for Lady
Cecilia, Titmouse could scarcely avoid perceiving how she despised him,
and shunned his company on every possible occasion. No person, from
merely seeing them, could have dreamed of their being husband and wife.
He made no secret at all (at least in his own peculiar visiting circles)
of his wishes that the earl's increasing age and infirmities might
quicken, and Lady Cecilia's apparently delicate health decline
apace--and thus accelerate the accession of Mr. Titmouse to the barony
of Drelincourt.

"Ha, ha!" would exclaim his choice boon companions, "won't it be
comical, Tit, to see you take your seat in the Upper House?"

"'Pon my soul, jolly, ah, ah!--Demme, I'll show the old stagers a funny
trick or two!"

"Capital!--ah, ah, ha!--Do the _donkey_? eh?--You'd make the
chancellor's wig jump off!"

"Ha, ha, ha!--I'll tickle 'em, or my name isn't Tittlebat Titmouse!"--By
all which was meant, that he purposed introducing into the House of
Lords that peculiar mode of debating which had earned him such quick
distinction in the House of Commons!

After they had spent about a month at Yatton, his urgent Parliamentary
duties required Mr. Titmouse to tear himself from that lovely
seclusion--that "bower of bliss"--and resume his arduous post in the
House. Though Lady Cecilia would have vastly preferred being left behind
at Yatton, decency seemed to require that the bride and bridegroom
should make their reappearance in the world jointly, and she was
therefore compelled to accompany him to town; and they were very soon
duly established in his new residence in Park Lane. It was spacious and
elegant--indeed it was furnished with great splendor, inasmuch as _carte
blanche_ had been given to a fashionable upholsterer. In a moment they
were both in the great whirling world of fashion. Lord Dreddlington gave
a series of dinner-parties on their account, as did several of their
distinguished kinsfolk and friends; and in due time their hospitalities
were returned by Mr. Titmouse. His first dinner-party went off with
great _éclat_, no fewer than four peers of the realm, with their ladies,
being among his guests. Mr. Titmouse led down to dinner the gigantic
Duchess of Tantallan, blazing in diamonds, his Grace the Duke bringing
up the rear with the Lady Cecilia--and the splendid affair was duly
announced, the ensuing morning, in the obsequious columns of the
_Aurora_. For some little time Mr. Titmouse occupied his novel and
dazzling position with an approach towards decorum and self-denial; but
as he became familiar with it, his old tastes revived, and Lady Cecilia
and her friends were gratified, for instance, while in the drawing-room
after dinner, by catching occasional sounds of Mr. Titmouse's celebrated
imitations of animals, which, once or twice, when considerably elevated,
he insisted upon giving on his re-entering the drawing-room! Indeed, he
spared no pains to acquire the power of pleasing society by the display
of rare accomplishments; for which purpose he took lessons every other
day in the _art diabolic_--_i. e._ in conjuring; in which he soon became
an expert proficient, and could play marvellous tricks upon cards and
with dice, eat pocket-handkerchiefs, cause wine-glasses visibly to sink
through solid tables, and perform sundry other astounding feats. Nor was
he long in collecting round him guests, who not only tolerated, but
professed infinite delight in, such entertainments--"fit audience,
_nor_ few"--consisting principally of those adventurous gentlemen who
have entered Parliament in a devout reliance on Providence to find them
dinners. 'T was only in such society as this that Titmouse could feel
the least sense of enjoyment, and from which Lady Cecilia altogether
absented herself, often without deigning the slightest reason, excuse,
or apology. In fact, the intemperate habits and irregular hours of
Titmouse, soon rendered it necessary that he and the Lady Cecilia should
occupy separate sleeping apartments; for either his club, the House, or
his other engagements, kept him out till a very late--or rather
early--hour every morning.

It was about half-past eleven o'clock one day towards the latter end of
June, that Mr. Titmouse, having finished breakfast, (which was surely
very early, since he had not gone to bed till four o'clock that
morning,) a meal to which he invariably sat down alone, often not
catching a glimpse of Lady Cecilia during the day, except on a chance
encounter in the hall, or on the stairs, or when they were forced to go
out to dinner together--had entered his library, to enjoy undisturbed
the luxury of his hookah. The apartment was spacious and handsome. All
the sides of it were occupied by very curious antique carved oak
bookcases, which had belonged to the former tasteful occupant of the
house, and from whom they had been purchased by Titmouse, who then
bethought himself of procuring books to fill them. For this purpose, it
luckily occurred to him, on seeing an advertisement of a library for
sale by auction one day, that it would be a good speculation to be
beforehand with the expected audience, and purchase the aforesaid
library in a lump by private contract. He did so--and at a remarkably
low price; giving directions that they should forthwith be carried to a
bookbinder, named by the obsequious auctioneer--with orders to bind
them all in elegant but as varied bindings as possible. Certainly the
works were of a somewhat miscellaneous character;--old Directories;
Poems by Young Ladies and Gentlemen; Ready-Reckoners; Doddridge's
Expositor; Hints on Etiquette; two hundred Minerva press novels;
triplicate copies of some twenty books on cookery; the art of war;
charades; Cudworth's Intellectual System; books of travels; Bibles,
dictionaries, prayer-books, plays; Treatises on Political Economy, and
Dancing; adventures of noted highwaymen; the classics: moral essays;
Enfield's Speaker; and Burn's Ecclesiastical Law. If these respectable
works had had the least sense of the distinction which had been so
unexpectedly bestowed upon them, they ought not to have murmured at
never afterwards receiving the slightest personal attention from their
spirited and gifted proprietor!--The room was lit by a large bow-window,
which, being partially open, admitted the pleasant breeze stirring
without; while the strong light was mitigated by the half-drawn blinds,
and the ample chintz window-draperies. On the mantelpiece stood one or
two small alabaster statues and vases, and a very splendid and
elaborately ornamented French timepiece. The only unpleasantness
perceptible, was the sort of disagreeable odor prevalent in rooms which,
as in the present instance, are devoted to smoking. To this apartment
had been also transferred many of the articles that I have described as
having been visible in his rooms at the Albany. Over the mantelpiece was
placed the picture of the boxers,--that of Mr. Titmouse being similarly
situated in the dining-room. On the present occasion, he wore a full
crimson dressing-gown, with yellow slippers; his shirt-collar was open,
and thrown down over his shoulders,--leaving exposed to view a quantity
of sand-colored hair under his throat. In fact, he looked the image of
some impudent scamp of a valet, who has, in his master's absence,
chosen to dress himself in that master's clothes, and affect his
luxurious airs. He lay on the sofa with his hookah in his left hand;
near him was the table, on which stood the _Morning Growl_, and some
eight or ten letters, only one or two of which had as yet been opened.
He had just leaned back his head, and with an air of tranquil enjoyment
very slowly expelled a mouthful of smoke, when a servant submissively
entered, and announced the arrival of a visitor--Mr. Gammon.

"How d' ye do, Gammon!--early, eh?" commenced Titmouse, without
stirring, and with infinite composure and nonchalance. Mr. Gammon made
the usual reply, and presently sat down in the chair placed for him by
the servant, nearly opposite to Mr. Titmouse--who, had he been
accustomed to observation, or capable of it, might have detected
something rather unusual in the flushed face, the anxious and restless
eye, and the _forced_ manner of his visitor.

"Likely to be a devilish hot day--'pon my soul!".--exclaimed Titmouse,
after again emptying his mouth--adding in a tolerably conceited
manner--"By the way--here's a letter from Snap--just opened it!--Rather
cool, after what's passed--eh? Dem him, asks me for a place under
government;--Ah--a--what's he fit for?"

"For what he _is_, and nothing else," replied Gammon, with a bitter
smile, glancing over poor Snap's letter, which Titmouse handed to him,
though marked "strictly confidential"--Gammon being undoubtedly the very
last man upon earth whom Snap would have wished to know of his
application.

"Were you at the House last night?" inquired Gammon--"They sat very
late! Lord Bulfinch made, I think, a very powerful speech"----

"Yes--devilish good--rather long though; and too many of those cursed
_figures_ that--by Jove--no one cares about!" replied Titmouse,
languidly.

He had by this time turned himself towards Mr. Gammon,--his right arm
and leg hanging carelessly over the further side of the sofa.

"Lady Cecilia is well, I hope?"

"Can't say--not seen her this week," drawled Titmouse. "I'll ring and
ask if you wish," he added, with an affected smile.

"Ah, my dear Titmouse," quoth Gammon, blandly, and with a smile of
delicious flattery, "I hope you don't give her Ladyship just cause for
_jealousy_?--eh? You must not avail yourself of your--your acknowledged
power over the sex--ahem!"

Mr. Titmouse, half closing his eyes, silently expelled a mouthful of
smoke, while an ineffable smile stole over his features.

"You must not neglect her Ladyship, Titmouse," quoth Gammon, gently
shaking his head, and with an anxiously deferential air.

"'Pon my life, I don't neglect her!--Public life, you know--eh?" replied
Titmouse, slowly, with his eyes closed, and speaking with the air of one
suffering from _ennui_. Here a pause of some moments ensued.

"Can we have about half an hour to ourselves, uninterruptedly?" at
length inquired Mr. Gammon.

"Ah--a--why--my singing-master is coming here a little after twelve,"
quoth Titmouse, turning himself round, so as to be able to look at the
clock on the mantelpiece.

"Oh, probably less than that period will suffice, if we shall not be
interrupted--may I ring the bell, and will you give orders to that
effect?" With this, Gammon rang the bell; and on the servant's
appearing:--

"I say, sir--do you hear, demme?" said Titmouse, "not at home--till
this gentleman's gone." The man bowed, and withdrew; and on his closing
the door, Gammon softly stepped after him and bolted it; by which time
Titmouse, somewhat startled, withdrew his hookah, for an instant, from
his mouth, and gazed rather anxiously at Gammon, about whose appearance
he then, for the first time, fancied he saw something unusual.

"Aha!--My stars, Mr. Gammon, we're going to be _devilish_ secret--aren't
we!" exclaimed Titmouse, with a faint smile, having watched Mr. Gammon's
movement with great surprise; and he began to smoke rather more
energetically than before, with his eye fixed on the grave countenance
of Mr. Gammon.

"My dear Titmouse," commenced his visitor, drawing his chair near to
him, and speaking in a very earnest but kindly manner, "does it never
astonish you, when you reflect on the stroke of fortune which has
elevated you to your present point of splendor and distinction?"

"Most amazing!--uncommon!" replied Titmouse, apprehensively.

"It _is_!--marvellous! unprecedented! You are the envy of hundreds upon
hundreds of thousands! Such an affair as yours does not happen above
once or twice in a couple of centuries--if so often! You cannot imagine
the feelings of delight with which _I_ regard all this--this brilliant
result of my long labors, and untiring devotion to your service."--He
paused.

"Oh, 'pon my life, yes; it's all very true," replied Titmouse, with a
little trepidation, replenishing the bowl of his hookah with tobacco.

"May I venture to hope, my dear Titmouse, that I have established my
claim to be considered, in some measure, as the sole architect of your
extraordinary fortunes--your earliest--your most constant friend?"

"You see, as I've often said, Mr. Gammon--I'm most uncommon obliged to
you for all favors--so help me----! and no mistake," said Titmouse,
exhibiting a countenance of increasing seriousness; and he rose from his
recumbent posture, and, still smoking, sat with his face turned full
towards Mr. Gammon, who resumed--

"As I am not in the habit, my dear Titmouse, of beating about the bush,
let me express a hope that you consider the services I have rendered you
not unworthy of requital"----

"Oh yes--to be sure--certainly," quoth Titmouse, slightly changing
color--"anything, by Jove, that's in my power--but it is most particular
unfortunate that--ahem!--so deuced hard up just now--but--ah, 'pon my
soul, I'll speak to Lord Bulfinch, or some of those people, and get you
something--though I sha'n't do anything of the kind for _Snap_--dem him!
You've no idea," continued Titmouse, anxiously, "how devilish thick Lord
Bulfinch and I are--he shakes hands with me when we meet alone in the
lobby--he does, 'pon my life."

"I am very much obliged, my dear Titmouse, for your kind offer--but I
have a _little_ political influence myself, when I think fit to exert
it," replied Gammon, gravely.

"Well, then," interrupted Titmouse, eagerly--"as for money, if that's
what--by jingo! but if _you_ don't know how _precious_ hard up one is
just now"--

"My dear sir," replied Gammon, his countenance sensibly darkening as he
went on, "the subject on which we are now engaged is one of
inexpressible interest and importance, in my opinion, to each of us; and
let us discuss it calmly. I am prepared to make a communication to you
immediately, which you will never forget to the day of your death. Are
you prepared to receive it?"

"Oh yes!--Never so wide awake in my life! O Lord! fire away!"--replied
Titmouse; and taking the tip of his hookah from his lips, and holding
it in the fingers of his left hand, he leaned forward, staring
open-mouthed at Gammon.

"Well, my dear Titmouse, then I will proceed. I will not enjoin you to
secrecy;--and that not merely because I have full confidence in your
honor--but because you cannot disclose it to any mortal man but at the
peril of immediate and utter ruin."

"'Pon my soul, most amazing! Demme, Mr. Gammon, you frighten me out of
my wits!" said Titmouse, turning paler and paler, as his recollection
became more and more distinct of certain mysterious hints of Mr.
Gammon's, many months before, at Yatton, as to his power over Titmouse.

"Consider for a moment. You are now a member of Parliament; the
unquestioned owner of a fine estate; the husband of a lady of very high
rank--the last direct representative of one of the proudest and most
ancient of the noble families of Great Britain; you yourself are next
but one in succession to almost the oldest barony in the kingdom; in
fact, in all human probability, you are the next LORD DRELINCOURT; and
all this through ME." He paused.

"Well--excuse me, Mr. Gammon--but I hear;--though--ahem! you're (meaning
no offence)--I can't for the life and soul of me tell what the devil it
is you're driving at"--said Titmouse, twisting his finger into his hair,
and gazing at Gammon with intense anxiety. For some moments Mr. Gammon
remained looking very solemnly and in silence at Titmouse; and then
proceeded.

"Yet you are _really_ no more entitled to _be_ what you seem--what you
are thought--or to possess what you at present possess--than--the little
wretch that last swept your chimneys here!"

The hookah dropped out of Titmouse's hand upon the floor, and he made
no effort to pick it up, but sat staring at Gammon, with cheeks almost
as white as his shirt-collar, and in blank dismay.

"I perceive you are agitated, Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon, kindly.

"By Jove--I should think so!" replied Titmouse, faintly; but he tried to
assume an incredulous smile--in vain, however; and to such a pitch had
his agitation reached, that he rose, opened a cabinet near him, and
taking out from it a brandy-flask and a wine-glass, poured it out full,
and drank it off. "You a'n't _joking_, Mr. Gammon, eh?" Again he
attempted a sickly smile.

"God forbid, Mr. Titmouse!"

"Well--but," faltered Titmouse, "_why_ a'n't I entitled to it all?
Hasn't the law given it to me? And can't the law do as it likes?"

"No one on earth knows the _what_ and the _why_ of this matter but
myself; and, if you choose, no one ever shall; nay, I will take care, if
you come this morning to my terms, to deprive even myself of all means
of proving what I can _now_ prove, at any moment I choose"----

"Lord, Mr. Gammon!" ejaculated Titmouse, passing his hand hastily over
his damp forehead--his agitation visibly increasing. "What's to be the
figure?" he faltered presently, and looked as if he dreaded to hear the
answer.

"If you mean, what are my _terms_--I will at once tell you:--they are
terms on which I shall peremptorily insist; they have been long fixed in
my own mind; I am quite inflexible; so help me Heaven, I will not vary
from them a hair's breadth! I require first, to sit in Parliament for
Yatton at the next election; and afterwards alternately with yourself;
and secondly, that you immediately grant me an annuity for my life of
two thousand pounds a-year on your"----

Titmouse sprang from the sofa, dashing his fist on the table, and
uttering a frightful imprecation. He stood for a moment, and then threw
himself desperately at full length on the sofa, muttering the same
execration which had first issued from his lips. Gammon moved not a
muscle, but fixed a steadfast eye on Titmouse; the two might have been
compared to the affrighted rabbit, and the deadly boa-constrictor.

"It's all a swindle!--a d----d swindle!" at length he exclaimed,
starting up into a sitting posture, and almost grinning defiance at
Gammon.

"You're a swindler!"--he exclaimed vehemently.

"Possibly--but _you_, sir, are a BASTARD," replied Gammon, calmly.
Titmouse looked the picture of horror, and trembled in every limb.

"It's a lie!--It's all a lie!"--he gasped.

"Sir, you are a _bastard_"--repeated Gammon, bitterly, and extending his
forefinger threateningly towards Titmouse. Then he added with sudden
vehemence--"Wretched miscreant--do you presume to tell me I lie? You
base-born cur!"--a lightning glance shot from his eye; but he restrained
himself. Titmouse sat at length as if petrified, while Gammon, in a low
tone, and with fearful bitterness of manner, proceeded--"_You_ the owner
of Yatton? _You_ the next Lord Drelincourt? No more than the helper in
your stables! One breath of mine blights you forever--as an impostor--a
mere audacious swindler--to be spit upon! to be kicked out of
society--perhaps to be transported for life. Gracious Heavens! what will
the Earl of Dreddlington say when he hears that his sole daughter and
heiress is married to a----It will kill _him_, or he will kill _you_!"

"Two can play at that," whispered Titmouse, faintly--indeed almost
inarticulately. There was nearly a minute's pause.

"No--but _is_ it all true?--honor!" inquired Titmouse, in a very subdued
voice.

"As God is my witness!" replied Gammon.

"Well," exclaimed Titmouse, after a prodigious sigh, "then at any rate,
you're in for it with me; you said just now you'd done it all. Aha! I
recollect, Mr. Gammon! I should no more have thought of it
_myself_--Lord! than--what d'ye say to _that_, Mr. Gammon?"

"Alas, sir! it will not avail you," replied Gammon, with a fearful
smile; "for I never made the dreadful discovery of your illegitimacy
till it was too late--till at least two months after I had put you (whom
I believed the true heir) into possession of Yatton!"

"Ah--I don't know--but--why didn't you tell Lord Dreddlington? Why did
you let me marry Lady Cicely? By Jove, but it's _you_ he'll kill," quoth
Titmouse, eagerly.

"Yes!--Alas! I ought to have done so," replied Mr. Gammon, with a
profound sigh--adding, abstractedly, "It may not be too late to make his
Lordship _some_ amends. I may save his _title_ from degradation. Lord
Drelincourt"----

"O Lord!" ejaculated Titmouse, involuntarily, and almost unconsciously,
staring stupidly at Gammon, who continued with a renewed sigh--"Yes, I
_ought_ to have told his Lordship--but I own--I was led away by feelings
of pity--of affection for YOU--and, alas! is this the return?" He spoke
this with a look and in a tone of sorrowful reproach.

"Well, you shouldn't have come down on one so suddenly--all at once--how
can a man--eh? Such _horrid_ news!"

"It has cost me, sir, infinitely greater pain to tell you, than it has
cost you to hear it!"

"By the living Jove!" exclaimed Titmouse, starting up with a sort of
recklessness, and pouring out and tossing off a second glassful of
brandy--"it _can't_ be true--it's all a dream! I--I a'n't--I _can't_ be
a bas---- perhaps _you're_ all this while the true heir, Mr. Gammon?"
he added briskly, and snapped his fingers at his companion.

"No, sir, I am not," replied Gammon, calmly; "but let me tell you, _I
know where he is to be found_, Mr. Titmouse! Do you commission me to go
in search of him?" he inquired, suddenly fixing his bright penetrating
eye upon Titmouse, who instantly stammered out--"O Lord! By Jove! no,
no!"

Gammon could scarcely suppress a bitter smile, so ludicrous were the
look and tone of Titmouse.

"You shouldn't have let me spend such a lot of money, if it wasn't mine
all the while"----

"The estate was, in a manner, Mr. Titmouse, in my _gift_; and in
pitching upon you, sir, out of several, I had imagined that I had chosen
a gentleman--a man grateful and honorable"----

"'Pon my solemn soul, so I _am_!" interrupted Titmouse, eagerly.

"I had but to scrawl a line or two with my pen, the very first day that
I saw you at the shop of Mr. Tag-rag--and there, sir--or in some similar
hole--you would have been at this moment!" replied Gammon, with a sudden
sternness which quite overawed Titmouse; totally losing sight, however,
of the very different account of the matter which he had given Titmouse
five minutes before; but the very best and most experienced liars have
short memories. Here it was, however, _Liar_ v. _Fool_; and the latter
did not perceive the slip made by his adversary--who, however, suddenly
became aware of his little inconsistency, and colored.

"You'll excuse me, sir," quoth Titmouse, presently; and with an air
which was becoming momentarily more timid and doubtful--"but _will_ you,
if all this isn't a bottle of smoke, tell me how you can _prove_ it all?
Because, you know, it isn't only _saying_ the thing that will do--you
know, Mr. Gammon?"

"Certainly--certainly! You are quite right, Mr. Titmouse! Nothing can be
more reasonable! Your curiosity shall be gratified. Aware that your
natural acuteness, my dear sir, would in all probability prompt you to
make the very observation you have now made, I have provided myself with
the two principal documents, and you shall see them; though I doubt
whether you will at first sight understand them, or appreciate their
importance; but, if you desire it, I will fully explain them to you."

With this he produced his pocket-book, and took out carefully two small
pieces of paper, folded up, which, after a very brief preliminary
explanation which made Titmouse tremble from head to foot, and no longer
disbelieve the representations of Gammon, he unfolded and read--Titmouse
looking affrightedly over his shoulder.

"Do I know the hand-writing?" he inquired faintly.

"Probably not," replied Gammon.

"It's a devilish queer sort of writing, and precious little of it"----

"It _is_, and when you consider"----

"Are both in the same handwriting?" inquired Titmouse, taking them into
his tremulous hand; while Gammon observed that his countenance indicated
the despair which had taken possession of him.

"That cursed curtain is so much in the light," said Titmouse, looking
up; and going towards it, as if to draw it aside, he started suddenly
away from Gammon, and with frenzied gestures tore the little papers to
pieces with inconceivable rapidity, and flung them out of the window,
where a brisk breeze instantly took them up, and scattered them
abroad--the glistening fragments--never to be again reunited.

Having performed this astounding feat, he instantly turned round, and
leaning his back against the window, gazed at Gammon with a desperate
air of mingled apprehension and triumph, but spoke not a word. Nor did
Gammon; but--oh the dreadful look with which he regarded Titmouse while
slowly approaching towards him! who, stepping aside, as Gammon advanced,
reached the cabinet, and with desperate rapidity threw open the door,
and, as if the devil had been waiting his bidding, in a moment turned
round upon Gammon with a pistol.

"So help me God, I'll fire!" gasped Titmouse, cocking and presenting
it--"I will--I WILL--_One!_--_Two!_--For God's sake! be off!--It's
loaded, and no mistake!--If I say _Th_--I'll fire, if I'm hanged for
it!"

"Booby! You may put your pistol down, sir!" said Gammon, calmly and
resolutely, a contemptuous smile passing over his whitened features.

"Demme!--distance!--Keep your distance!" cried Titmouse, his voice
quivering with agitation.

"Ridiculous simpleton!--You poor rogue!" said Gammon, laughingly. There
was, however, _murder_ in his smile; and Titmouse instinctively
perceived it. He kept his deadly weapon pointed full at Gammon's breast,
but his hand trembled violently. 'T was wonderful that some chance
motion of the shaking finger of Titmouse, did not send a bullet through
Mr. Gammon's heart.

He stood, for a minute or two, gazing steadfastly, and without moving,
at Titmouse; and then, shrugging his shoulders, with a bitter smile
returned to his chair, and resumed his seat. Titmouse, however, refused
to follow his example.

"So help me God, sir! I will not hurt a hair of your head," said
Gammon, earnestly. Still Titmouse remained at the window, pistol in
hand. "Why should I hurt you? What have you _now_ to fear, you little
idiot?" inquired Gammon, impatiently. "Do you, then, really think you
have injured me? Do you positively think me so great a fool, my friend,
as really to have trusted you with the precious originals, of which
those were only the copies?--Copies which I can replace in a minute or
two's time! The originals, believe me, are far away, and safe enough
under lock and key!"

"I--I--I don't believe you," gasped Titmouse, dropping the hand that
held the pistol, and speaking in a truly dismal tone.

"That does not signify, my excellent little rogue," said Gammon, with an
infernal smile, "if the _fact_ be so. That you are a fool, you must by
this time even yourself begin to suspect; and you surely _can't_ doubt
that you are something like an arrant villain after what has just taken
place? Eh? 'T was a bright idea truly--well conceived and boldly
executed. I give you all the credit for it; and it is only your
misfortune that it was not successful. So let us now return to business.
Uncock your pistol--replace it in your cabinet, and resume your seat; or
in one minute's time I leave you, and go direct to Lord Dreddlington;
and if so, you had better use that pistol in blowing out your _own_
brains--if you have any."

Titmouse, after a moment or two's pause of irresolution, passively
obeyed--very nearly on the point of crying aloud with disappointment and
impotent rage; and he and Gammon were presently again sitting opposite
to one another.

Gammon was cold and collected--yet must it not have cost him a
prodigious effort? Though he had told Titmouse that they were _copies_
only which he had destroyed, they were, nevertheless, the ORIGINALS,
which, with such an incredible indiscretion, he had trusted into the
hands of Titmouse; they were the ORIGINALS which Titmouse had just
scattered to the winds; and who, in so doing, had suddenly--but
unknowingly--broken to pieces the wand of the enchanter who had long
exercised over him so mysterious and despotic an authority!--How comes
it, that we not unfrequently find men of the profoundest craft, just at
the very crisis of their fortunes, thus unexpectedly, irretrievably, and
incredibly committing themselves? In the present instance, the only
satisfactory way of accounting for Mr. Gammon's indiscretion, would seem
to be by referring it to a sense of security engendered by his utter
contempt for Titmouse.

"Are you _now_ satisfied, Mr. Titmouse, that you are completely at my
mercy, and at the same time totally undeserving of it?" said Gammon,
speaking in a low and earnest tone, and with much of his former kindness
of manner. To an observant eye, however, what was at that moment the
real expression in that of Gammon? Soothing and gentle as was his voice,
he felt as if he could instantly have destroyed the audacious little
miscreant before him. But he proceeded with wonderful self-command--"Do
not, my dear Titmouse, madly make me your enemy--your enemy for
life--but rather your friend--your watchful and powerful friend and
protector, whose every interest is identified with your own. Remember
all that I have done and sacrificed for you--how I have racked my brain
for you day and night--always relying upon your ultimate gratitude. Oh,
the endless scheming I have had to practise, to conceal your fatal
secret--and of which you shall ere long know more! During these last two
years have I not ruinously neglected my own interests, to look after
yours?"

Gammon paused, and abruptly added--"I have but to lift my finger, and
this splendid dressing-gown of yours, my poor Titmouse, is exchanged
for a prison-jacket"----

"Oh Lord! oh Lord! oh Lord!" suddenly exclaimed Titmouse, with a
shudder--"I wish I were dead and forgotten! oh Lord! what shall I do?
'Pon my _soul_"--he struck his forehead with some violence--"I'm going
mad"----

"Consider, Mr. Titmouse, calmly, how reasonable and moderate is my
offer"--proceeded Gammon; who now and then, however, experienced changes
of color, on the sudden recurrence of a sense of his last misfortune.

"Here's Lady Cicely to have £3,000 a-year," passionately interposed
Titmouse.

"Not till after your death, my dear sir"----

"Then she shall have it directly; for curse me if I don't kill
myself!"----

"Then she would never have a farthing--for I should instantly produce
the real heir"----

"Yah!" exclaimed Titmouse, uttering a sound like the sharp, furious bark
of a cur, foiled at all points. He threw himself on the sofa, and folded
his arms on his breast, compressing them, as it were, with convulsive
vehemence.

"Do not excite yourself, Mr. Titmouse--you are still one of the most
fortunate men upon earth, to have fallen into hands like mine, I can
assure you! You will still enjoy a truly splendid income--little short
of nine thousand a-year--for I will undertake to raise the Yatton
rental, within a few short months, to twelve or thirteen thousand
a-year, as I have often told you--I have explained to you over and over
again, how absurdly under their value they were let in the time of"----

"And you've perhaps forgotten that I've borrowed nearly fifty thousand
pounds--that costs nothing, I suppose!"

"Well, certainly, you must be a little careful for a year or two, that's
all"----

"Demme, sir!--I must give up my _yacht_!" exclaimed Titmouse,
desperately, snapping his thumb and finger vehemently at Gammon.

"Yes--or Yatton," replied Gammon, sternly. "After all--what more shall I
be than a sort of steward of yours?"

"I don't want one," interrupted Titmouse; and, starting from the sofa,
walked to the window, where he stood with his back turned towards
Gammon, and crying! Gammon eyed him for several minutes in silence; and
then slowly approaching him, tapped him briskly on the shoulder.
Titmouse started. "Come, sir--you have now, I hope, relieved your small
feelings, and must attend to me--and be prompt, too, sir! The time for
trifling, and playing the baby, or the girl, is gone. Hark you,
sir!--yield me my terms, or this very day I spring a mine under your
feet, you little villain! that shall blow you into ten thousand atoms,
and scatter them wider than ever you scattered just now those bits of
worthless paper! Do you hear that?" As he said this, he took hold of the
collar of Titmouse's dressing-gown, which Titmouse felt to be grasped by
a hand, tightening momentarily. Titmouse made no reply; but gazed at
Gammon with a countenance full of distress and terror.

"Pause," continued Gammon, in a low vehement tone and manner, "and you
are lost--stripped of this gaudy dress--turned out of this splendid
house into the streets, or a prison!--If I quit this room--and I will
not wait much longer--without your plain and written consent to my
terms, I shall go direct to my Lord Dreddlington, and tell him the
obscure and base-born impostor that has crept"----

"Oh, Mr. Gammon--Mr. Gammon! have mercy on me!" exclaimed Titmouse,
shaking like an aspen-leaf--at length realizing the terrible extent of
danger impending over him.

"Have mercy on yourself!" rejoined Gammon, sternly.

"I will!--I'll do all you ask--I will, so help me----!"

"I'm glad to hear it!" said Gammon, relaxing his hold of Titmouse; and,
in a voice of returning kindness, adding--"Oh, Titmouse, Titmouse! how
fearful would be the scene--when your noble father-in-law--alas! you
must have quitted the country! His Lordship would have instantly
divorced you from the Lady Cecilia!"

"You can't think how I love Lady Cicely!" exclaimed Titmouse, in a
broken voice.

"Ay--but would she love _you_, if she knew who and what you were?"

"Oh Lord! oh Lord! I love Lady Cicely! I love Lady Cicely!"

"Then get pen, ink, and paper, if you would not lose her forever!"

"Here they are, Mr. Gammon!" exclaimed Titmouse, hastily stepping to his
desk which lay on the table; and with tremulous eagerness he got out a
quire of writing-paper and took a pen. "Suppose _you_ write, Mr.
Gammon," said he, suddenly--"my hand trembles so! Lord! I feel so sick,
I'll sign anything you like!"

"Perhaps it would be better," replied Gammon, sitting down, and dipping
his pen into the inkstand; "it may save time." He commenced writing;
and, as he went on, said at intervals--"Yes, Titmouse! Thank God, all is
now over! It shall no longer be in Lord Dreddlington's power--no, nor
any one's--to beggar you--to transport you--to take your noble wife from
you"----

"Oh, no, no! You know Lady Cicely's taken me for better for worse, for
richer for poorer!" interrupted Titmouse, in a sort of agony of
apprehension.

"Ah, Titmouse! But she did not know, when she said that, that she was
speaking to a"----

"What! wouldn't it have held good?" exclaimed Titmouse, perfectly
aghast.

"We need not speculate on a case that cannot arise, my dear Titmouse,"
replied Gammon, eying him steadfastly, and then resuming his
writing.--"This paper becomes, as they say at sea, your
sheet-anchor!--Here you shall remain--the owner of Yatton--of this
splendid house--husband of Lady Cecilia--a member of Parliament--and in
due time, as 'my Lord Drelincourt,' take your place permanently in the
Upper House of Parliament, among the hereditary legislators of your
country. Now, Mr. Titmouse, sign your name, and there's an end forever
of all your unhappiness!"

Titmouse eagerly took the pen, and, with a very trembling hand affixed
his signature to what Gammon had written.

"You'll sign it too, eh?" he inquired timidly.

"Certainly, my dear Titmouse."--Gammon affixed his signature, after a
moment's consideration.--"Now we are both bound--we are friends for
life! Let us shake hands, my dear, dear Titmouse, to bind the bargain!"

They did so, Gammon cordially taking into his hands those of Titmouse,
who, in his anxiety and excitement, never once thought of asking Mr.
Gammon to allow him to read over what had been just signed.

"Oh Lord!" he exclaimed, heaving a very deep sigh, "It seems as if we'd
been only in a dream! I begin to feel _something like_ again!--it's
really all right?"

"On my sacred word of honor," replied Gammon, laying his hand on his
heart, "provided you perform the engagement into which you have this day
entered."

"Never fear! honor bright!" said Titmouse, placing _his_ on his heart,
with as solemn a look as he could assume.

Mr. Gammon, having folded up the paper, put it into his pocket-book.

"I was a trifle too deep for you, Titmouse, eh?" said he,
good-humoredly. "How could you suppose me green enough to bring you the
_real_ documents?" he added with perfect command of voice and feature.

"Where are they?" inquired Titmouse, timidly.

"At a banker's, in a double-iron strong box, with three different
locks."

"Lord!--But, _in course_, you'll put them into the fire when I've
performed my agreement, eh?"

Gammon looked at him for a moment, doubtful what answer to make to this
unexpected question.

"My dear Titmouse," said he at length, "I will be candid--I must
preserve them--but no human eye shall ever see them except my own."

"My stars!--Excuse me"--stammered Titmouse, uneasily.

"Never fear _my_ honor, Titmouse! Have you ever had reason to do so?"

"No--never! It's quite true! And why don't you trust _me_?"

"Have you forgotten!--_Did_ I not trust you--_as you supposed_"--quickly
subjoined Gammon, positively on the point of again committing
himself--"and when you fancied you really had in your power the precious
original documents?"

"Oh! well"--said Titmouse, his face flushing all over--"but that's all
past and gone."

"You _must_ rely on my honor--and I'll tell you why. What would be
easier than for me to pretend to you that the papers which you might see
me burn, were really the originals--and yet be no such thing?"

"In course--yes; I see!" replied Titmouse--who, however, had really not
comprehended the case which Gammon had put to him. "Well--but--I
say--excuse me, Mr. Gammon"--said Titmouse, hesitatingly returning, as
Gammon imagined, to the charge--"but--you said something about the
_real_ heir."

"Certainly. There _is_ such a person, I assure you!"

"Well--but since you and I, you know, have made it up, and are friends
for life--eh? What's to be done with the fellow? (betwixt ourselves!)"

"That is at present no concern--nay, it never will be any concern of
yours or mine. Surely it is enough for you, that you are enjoying the
rank and fortune belonging to some one else? Good gracious! I can't help
reminding you--fancy the natural son of a cobbler--figuring away as the
Right Honorable Lord Drelincourt--while all the while, the real Lord
Drelincourt is--nay, at this moment, pining, poor soul! in poverty and
obscurity."

"Well--I dare say he's used to it, so it can't hurt him much! But I've
been thinking, Mr. Gammon, couldn't we get him--pressed? or enlisted
into the army?--He's a deuced deal better out of the way, you know, for
both of us!"

"Sir!" interrupted Gammon, speaking very seriously, and even with a
melancholy and apprehensive air--"leave the future to _me_. I have made
all requisite arrangements, and am myself implicated already to a
fearful extent on your behalf. The only person on earth, besides myself,
who can disturb my arrangements, is yourself."

Here a gentle tapping was heard at the door.

"Be off!" shouted Titmouse, with angry impatience; but Mr. Gammon, who
was anxious himself to be gone, stepped to the door, and opening it, a
servant entered--a tall graceful footman, with powdered hair,
shoulder-knot, and blue and yellow livery--and who obsequiously
intimated to Mr. Titmouse, that Signor Sol-fa had been in attendance for
at least half-an-hour.

"A--a--I don't sing to-day--let him come to-morrow," said Titmouse, with
attempted ease, and the servant withdrew.

"Farewell, Mr. Titmouse--I have a most important engagement awaiting me
at the office--so I must take my leave. Will you execute the necessary
documents so soon as they are ready? I will cause them to be prepared
immediately."

"Oh, yes!"--and he added in a lower tone--"take care, Mr. Gammon, that
no one knows _why_!--eh, you know?"

"Leave that to _me_!--Good-morning, Mr. Titmouse," replied Gammon,
buttoning his surtout, and taking up his gloves and hat; and having
shaken Titmouse by the hand, he was the next moment in the street--where
he heaved a prodigious sigh--which, however, only momentarily relieved
his pent-up bosom from the long-suppressed rage, the mortification, the
wounded pride, and the wild apprehension with which it was nearly
bursting. Why, what a sudden and dismaying disaster had befallen him!
And what but his own inconceivable folly had occasioned it? His own
puppet had beaten him; had laid him prostrate; 't was as though Prospero
had permitted Caliban to wheedle him out of his wand!--What could Gammon
possibly have been thinking about, when he trusted the originals into
the hands of Titmouse? As Gammon recognized no overruling Providence, he
was completely at a loss to account for an act of such surpassing
thoughtlessness and weakness as he had committed--at the mere
recollection of which, as he walked along he ground his teeth together
with the vehemence of his emotions. After a while, he reflected that
regrets were idle--the future, not the past, was to be considered; and
how he had to deal with the new state of things which had so suddenly
been brought about. All he had thenceforth to trust to, was his mastery
over the fears of a fool. But was he _really_, on consideration, in a
worse position than before? Had Titmouse turned restive at any time
while Gammon possessed the documents in question, could Gammon have had
more effectual control over him than he still had, while he had
succeeded in persuading Titmouse that such documents were still in
existence? Could the legality of the transaction which Gammon sought to
effect, be upheld one whit the more in the one case than in the other,
if Titmouse took it into his head resolutely to resist? Again, could a
transaction of such magnitude, could so serious a diminution of
Titmouse's income, remain long concealed from his father-in-law, Lord
Dreddlington, who, Gammon knew, was every now and then indicating much
anxiety on the subject of his son-in-law's finances? Was it possible to
suppose the earl disposed to acquiesce, in any event, in such an
arrangement? Suppose again Titmouse, in some moment of caprice, or under
the influence of wine, should disclose to the earl the charge on the
estate given to Gammon; and that, either sinking, or revealing, the true
ground on which Gammon rested a claim of such magnitude? Gracious
Heavens! thought Gammon--fancy the earl really made acquainted with the
true state of the case! What effect would so terrible a disclosure
produce upon him?

Here a bold stroke occurred to Mr. Gammon: what if he were himself, as
it were, to take the bull by the horns--to be beforehand with Titmouse,
and apprise the earl of the frightful calamity which had befallen him
and his daughter? Gammon's whole frame vibrated with the bare imagining
of the scene which would probably ensue. But what would be the practical
use to be made of it? The first shock over, if, indeed, the old man
survived it--would not the possession of such a secret give Gammon a
complete hold upon the earl, and render him, in effect, obedient to his
wishes?




CHAPTER IV.


The object which Gammon had originally proposed to himself, and
unwaveringly fixed his eye upon amid all the mazy tortuosities of his
course, since taking up the cause of Tittlebat Titmouse, was his own
permanent establishment in the upper sphere of society; conscious that,
above all, could he but once emerge into political life, his energies
would insure him speedy distinction. With an independent income of
£2,000 a-year, he felt that he should be standing on sure ground. But
even above and beyond this, there was one dazzling object of his hopes
and wishes, which, unattained, would, on several accounts, render all
others comparatively valueless--a union with Miss Aubrey. His heart
fluttered within him at the bare notion of such an event. What effect
would be produced upon that beautiful, that pure, high-minded, but
haughty creature--for haughty to _him_ had Kate Aubrey ever
appeared--by a knowledge that he, Gammon, possessed the means--Bah!
accursed Titmouse!--thought Gammon, his cheek suddenly blanching
as he recollected that through him _those means_ no longer
existed.--Stay!--Unless, indeed--...--which would, however, be all but
impossible--perilous in the extreme! Absorbed with these reflections, he
started on being accosted by the footman of the Earl of Dreddlington;
who, observing Gammon, had ordered his carriage to draw up, to enable
his Lordship to speak to him. It was the end of Oxford Street nearest to
the City.

"Sir--Mr. Gammon--good-day, sir!"--commenced the earl, with a slight
appearance of disappointment, and even displeasure, "pray, has anything
unfortunate happened"----

"Unfortunate! I beg your Lordship's pardon"----interrupted Gammon,
coloring visibly, and gazing with surprise at the earl.

"You do not _generally_, Mr. Gammon, forget your appointments. The
marquis, I, and the gentlemen of the Direction, have been waiting for
you in vain at the office for a whole hour."

"Good Heavens! my Lord--I am confounded!" said Gammon, suddenly
recollecting the engagement he had made with the earl: "I have forgotten
everything in a sudden fit of indisposition, with which I have been
seized at the house of a client at Bayswater. I can but apologize, my
Lord"----

"Sir, say no more; your looks are more than sufficient; and I beg that
you will do me the honor to accept a seat in my carriage, and tell me
whither you will be driven. I'm at your service, Mr. Gammon, for at
least an hour; longer than that I cannot say, as I have to be at the
House; you remember our two bills have to be forwarded a stage"----

Since his Lordship was as peremptory as politeness would permit him to
be, in got Gammon, and named THE GUNPOWDER AND FRESHWATER COMPANY'S
Offices, in Lothbury, in the hopes of finding yet some of the gentlemen
whom he had so sadly disappointed; and thither, having turned his
horses' heads, drove the coachman.

"Sir," said the earl, after much inquiry into the nature of Gammon's
recent indisposition, "by the way, what can be the meaning of my Lord
Tadpole's opposition to the second reading of our bill, No. 2?"

"We offered his Lordship no shares, my Lord--that is the secret. I saw
him a few days ago, and he sounded me upon the subject; but--I'm sure
your Lordship will understand--in a company such as ours, my Lord"----

"Sir, I quite comprehend you, and I applaud your vigilant
discrimination. Sir, in affairs of this description, in order to
_secure_ the confidence of the public, it is a matter of the last
importance that none but men of the highest--by the way, Mr. Gammon, how
are the GOLDEN EGG shares? Would you advise me to sell"----

"Hold, my Lord, a little longer. We are going, in a few days' time, to
publish some important information concerning the prospects of the
undertaking, of the most brilliant character, and which cannot fail to
raise the value of the shares, and _then_ will be the time to sell! Has
your Lordship signed the deed yet?"

"Sir, I signed it last Saturday, in company with my Lord Marmalade. I
should not like to part with my interest in the company, you see--Mr.
Gammon--hastily; but I am in your hands"----

"My Lord, I am ever watchful of your Lordship's interests."

"By the way, will you dine with me to-morrow? We shall be quite alone,
and I am very anxious to obtain an accurate account of the present state
of Mr. Titmouse's property; for, to tell you the truth, I have heard of
one or two little matters that occasion me some uneasiness."

"Can anything be more unfortunate, my Lord? I am engaged out to dinner
for the next three days--if indeed I shall be well enough to go to any
of them," said Gammon, with an agitation which could have escaped the
observation of few persons except the Earl of Dreddlington.

"Sir--I exceedingly regret to hear it; let me trust that some day next
week I shall be more fortunate. There are several matters on which I am
desirous of consulting you. When did you last see Mr. Titmouse?"

"Let me see, my Lord--I--don't think I've seen him since Monday last,
when I casually met him in one of the committee-rooms of the House of
Commons, where, by the way, he seems a pretty frequent attendant."

"I'm glad to hear it," replied the earl, somewhat gravely; and, as
Gammon imagined, with a slight expression of surprise, or even distrust.
Gammon therefore fancied that the earl had received recent intelligence
of some of the wild pranks of his hopeful son-in-law, and wished to make
inquiries concerning them of Gammon

"Will you, sir,--by the way--have the goodness to write at your earliest
convenience to General Epaulette's solicitors, and tell them I wish to
pay off immediately £12,000 of his mortgage? Oblige me, sir, by
attending to this matter without delay; for I met the general the other
day at dinner--and--I might possibly have been mistaken, sir--but I
fancied he looked at me as if he wished me to feel myself his debtor. Do
you understand me, sir? It annoyed me; and I wish to get out of his
hands as soon as possible."

"Rely upon it, my Lord, it shall be attended to this very day," replied
Gammon, scarcely able--troubled though he was--to suppress a smile at
the increasing symptoms of purse-pride in the earl, whose long-empty
coffers were being so rapidly and unexpectedly replenished by the
various enterprises into which, under Gammon's auspices, his Lordship
had entered with equal energy and sagacity. While the earl was speaking,
the carriage drew up at the door of the company's office, and Gammon
alighted. The earl, however, finding that all the gentlemen whom he had
left there, had quitted, drove off westward, at a smart pace, and
reached the House in time for the matters which he had mentioned to Mr.
Gammon. That gentleman soon dropped the languid demeanor he had worn in
Lord Dreddlington's presence, and addressed himself with energy and
decision to a great number of important and difficult matters demanding
his attention--principally connected with several of the public
companies in which he was interested--and one of which, in particular,
required the greatest possible care and tact, in order to prevent its
bursting--prematurely. He had also to get through a considerable arrear
of professional affairs, and to write several letters on the private
business of Lord Dreddlington, and of Mr. Titmouse--respectively. Nay,
he had one or two still more urgent calls upon his attention. First came
the action against himself for £4,000 penalties, for bribery, arising
out of the Yatton election, and as to which he had received, that
afternoon, a very gloomy "_opinion_" from Mr. Lynx, who was "advising"
him on his defence. Much in the same plight, also, were Messrs.
Bloodsuck, Mudflint, and Woodlouse, for whom Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap were defending similar actions; and who were worried out of their
lives by daily letters from their terror-stricken clients, as to the
state, progress, and prospects of the several causes in which they were
so deeply interested. All these actions were being pressed forward by
the plaintiffs with a view to trial at the ensuing York assizes; had
been made, by the plaintiffs, special juries; and, infinitely to
Gammon's vexation and alarm, he had found, on hurrying to retain Mr.
Subtle, that he, Mr. Sterling, and Mr. Crystal, had been already
retained for the plaintiffs! Lastly, he was dreadfully teased by an
action of seduction, which had, a few days before, been brought against
Mr. Titmouse; and which Gammon, finding it to be a very bad case, was
making great efforts to compromise. To each and every of these matters,
he gave the attention that was due--and, about seven o'clock, having
finished his labors for the day, repaired, a good deal exhausted, to his
chambers at Thavies' Inn. After a slight repast, he proceeded to draw up
confidential "_instructions_" for Mr. Frankpledge, to frame the deeds
necessary to carry into effect his contemplated arrangement with
Titmouse. That did not take him long; and having sealed up his packet,
and addressed it, he threw himself down on the sofa, and gave himself up
to anxious meditation, for he was aware that he was now, as it were,
touching the very crisis of his fortunes. Again, again, and again he
recurred to the incident of the day--the destruction of his documents by
Titmouse; and cursed his own inconceivable stupidity, even aloud. Yet he
could not avoid indulging at the same time in secret pride and
exultation at the presence of mind which he had displayed--the
successful skill with which he had encountered so sudden, singular, and
serious an emergency. But what would be the effect of the destruction of
those documents, upon _certain secret arrangements_ of his connected
with Titmouse's recovery of the Yatton property? This was a question
which occasioned Gammon great perplexity and apprehension. Then, as to
Gammon's rent-charge of £2,000 per annum on the Yatton estates--he
bethought himself, with no little uneasiness, of some expressions
concerning Titmouse's property, let fall by the earl that day: and if
his Lordship should persevere in his determination to become minutely
acquainted with the state of Titmouse's property, how could the new and
heavy encumbrance about to be laid upon it, possibly escape discovery?
and if it did, how was it to be accounted for, or supported? Confound
it! It seemed as if fate were bent upon urging on a catastrophe!

"Shall I," thought Gammon, "wait till I am challenged on the subject,
and then fire my shot, and bring his Lordship down from the tight-rope?
Then, however, I cannot but appear to have known the thing from the
very beginning; and who knows what liabilities, civil or criminal--of
fraud or conspiracy--may be attached to what I have done! Shall I wait
for a convenient, though early opportunity, and rush, with dismay and
confusion, into the earl's presence, as with a discovery only just made?
By Heaven! but the thing wears already a very ugly appearance. If it
come out, what an uproar will be in the world! The lightning will fall
on my head first, unless I take care. The discovery will doubtless kill
Lord Dreddlington; and as for his daughter, it may overturn the little
reason she has!"

Passing from this subject, Gammon surveyed his other relations with the
earl, which were becoming daily more involved and critical. He had
seduced his Lordship into various mercantile speculations, such as had
already placed him in a very questionable point of view, as taking
deliberate, systematic advantage of the raging mania for bubble
companies. In fact, Gammon had, by his skilful but not very scrupulous
manœuvring, already put into Lord Dreddlington's pocket some forty
thousand pounds, and at the same time involved his Lordship in
liabilities which he never dreamed of, and even Gammon himself had not
contemplated. Then he warmed with his apparent proximity to Parliament,
(to that part of Titmouse's bargain Gammon resolved to hold him to the
very letter,) which he was sure of entering on the very next election.
By that time he would have realized a sum, through his connection with
the various companies, which, even independently of the income to be
derived thereafter from the Yatton property, would render him so far
independent as to warrant him in dissolving partnership with Messrs.
Quirk and Snap, and quitting at least the _practice_ of the profession.

Mr. Gammon was a man of very powerful mind, possessing energies of the
highest order, and for the development and display of which he felt, and
fretted when he felt, his present position in society afforded him no
scope whatever, till at least he had entered upon that series of bold
but well-conceived plans and purposes with which he has been represented
as occupied, since the time when he first became the secret master of
the fortunes of Titmouse. His ambition was boundless, and he felt within
himself a capacity for the management of political affairs of no
ordinary magnitude, could he but force himself into the regions where
his energies and qualifications could be discovered and appreciated.
Indeed, I will undertake to say, that, had Gammon only been a GOOD man,
he would, in all probability, have become a great one. But, to proceed
with the matters which were then occupying his busy brain. There was yet
one upon which all his thoughts settled with a sort of agitating
interest--his connection with the Aubreys; and whenever that name
occurred to his thoughts, one beauteous image rose before him like that
of an angel--I mean Miss Aubrey. She was the first object that had ever
excited in him any, the faintest, semblance of the passion of
_love_--that love, I mean, which is in a manner purified and sublimated
from all grossness or sensuality by a due appreciation of intellectual
and moral excellence. When he dwelt upon the character of Miss Aubrey,
and for a moment realized the possibility of a union with her, he felt,
as it were, elevated above himself. Then her person was very beautiful;
and there was a certain bewitching _something_ about her manners, which
Gammon could only _feel_, not describe; in short, his passion for her
had risen to a most extraordinary pitch of intensity, and became a sort
of infatuation. In spite of all that had happened at Yatton, he had
contrived to continue, and was at that moment, on terms of considerable
intimacy with the Aubreys; and had, moreover, been all the while so
watchful over himself as to have given none of them any reason to
suspect the state of his feelings towards Miss Aubrey; and, on the other
hand, nothing had ever transpired to give him the slightest inkling of
the state of matters between Miss Aubrey and Delamere--with the
exception of one solitary circumstance which had at the moment excited
his suspicions--Mr. Delamere's contesting the borough of Yatton. Though
he had watched for it, however, nothing had afterwards occurred
calculated to confirm his apprehensions. He had taken infinite pains to
keep a good name in Vivian Street, with great art representing, from
time to time, his disgust for the conduct and character of Titmouse, and
the reluctance with which he discharged his professional duty towards
that gentleman. He made a point of alluding to the "gross and malignant
insult" which had been offered at the hustings to the venerable Vicar of
Yatton, and which, he said, was a sudden suggestion of Mr. Titmouse's,
and carried into effect by "that vile Unitarian parson, Mudflint," in
defiance of Mr. Gammon's wishes to the contrary. He represented himself
as still haunted by the mild, reproachful look with which Dr. Tatham had
regarded him, as though he had been the author of the insult. The
account which appeared in the _True Blue_ of his indignant interference
on the occasion of Mr. Delamere's being struck on the hustings, was
calculated, as Mr. Gammon conceived, to corroborate his representations,
and aid the impression he was so anxious to produce. For the same
reason, Mr. Gammon, whenever he had been at Yatton, had acted with great
caution and secrecy, so as to give no cause of offence to Dr. Tatham; to
whom he from time to time complained, in confidence, of those very acts
of Mr. Titmouse which had been dictated to him by Mr. Gammon. Thus
_reasoned_ Mr. Gammon; but it would indeed have been singular had he
_succeeded_ as he desired and expected. He lost sight of the proverbial
influence of one's wishes over one's belief. In imagining that he had
concealed from the Aubreys all the unfavorable features of his conduct,
was he not, in some degree, exhibiting the folly of the bird, which,
thrusting its _head_ only into the bush, imagines that it has thereby
concealed its whole body?

The Aubreys knew amply sufficient to warrant a general dislike and
distrust of Mr. Gammon; but there existed grave reasons for avoiding any
line of conduct which Gammon might choose to consider offensive. Mr.
Aubrey justly regarded him as standing, at present, alone between him
and some of his most serious liabilities. If Gammon, to accomplish
objects to them undiscoverable, wore a mask--why challenge his enmity by
attempting to tear off that mask? Mr. Aubrey governed his movements,
therefore, with a prudent caution; and though, after the election, and
the infamous decision of the election committee, Gammon was received at
Vivian Street--whither he went with no little anxiety and
trepidation--it was with a visibly increased coolness and reserve, but
still with studious _courtesy_; and beyond that distinct but delicate
line, none of them ever advanced a hair's-breadth, which Gammon observed
with frequent and heavy misgivings. But he felt that something must at
length be _done_, or attempted, to carry into effect his fond wishes
with reference to Miss Aubrey. Months had elapsed, and their relative
position seemed totally unchanged since the first evening that his
manœuvre had procured him a brief introduction to Mrs. Aubrey's
drawing-room. In fact, he considered that the time had arrived for
making known, in some way or another, the state of his feelings to Miss
Aubrey; and after long deliberation, he resolved to do so without loss
of time, and, moreover, personally. He had a fearful suspicion that he
should be--at all events at first--unsuccessful; and now that, having
taken his determination, he passed in rapid review all their
intercourse, he perceived less and less ground for being sanguine;
for he felt that Miss Aubrey's manner towards him had been throughout
more cold and guarded than that of either Mr. or Mrs. Aubrey. Like
a prudent general contemplating the contingencies of an important
expedition, and calculating his means of encountering them, Gammon
considered--_persuasion_ failing--what means of _compulsion_ had he? He
came, at length, finally to the conclusion, that his resources were most
available at that moment; and, moreover, that his circumstances
_required_ an immediate move.

The very next day, about ten o'clock, he sallied forth from his
chambers, and bent his steps towards Vivian Street, intending to keep
watch for at least a couple of hours, with a view to ascertaining
whether Mrs. Aubrey's going out unaccompanied by Miss Aubrey would
afford him an opportunity of seeing Miss Aubrey, alone and undisturbed;
reasonably reckoning on the absence of Mr. Aubrey at the Temple, whither
he knew he always went about half-past nine o'clock. That day, however,
Mr. Gammon watched in vain; during the time that he stayed, only the
servants and the children quitted the door. The next day he walked
deliberately close past the house; was that brilliant and tasteful
performance of the piano, _hers_? Again, however, he was unsuccessful.
On the third day, from a safe distance, he beheld both Mrs. and Miss
Aubrey, accompanied by a female servant and the children, quit the
house, and walk in the direction of the Park, whither--but at a great
distance--he followed their movements with a beating heart. On a
subsequent occasion, he saw Miss Aubrey leave the house, accompanied
only by little Charles, and he instantly turned his steps despondingly
eastward. How little did either of those fair beings dream of the
strict watch thus kept upon their every movement! Two days afterwards,
however, Gammon's perseverance was rewarded; for shortly after eleven
o'clock, he beheld Mrs. Aubrey, accompanied by the two children, quit
the house, and turn towards the Park. Gammon's heart began to beat hard.
Though he never cared much for dress, his appearance on the present
occasion afforded indications of some little _attention_ to it; and he
appeared simply a well-dressed gentleman, in a dark-blue buttoned
surtout, with velvet collar, and plain black stock, as, after a moment's
somewhat flurried pause, he knocked and rang at Mr. Aubrey's door.

"Is Mr. Aubrey within?" he inquired of the very pretty and
respectable-looking maid-servant, who presently answered his summons.

"No, sir; he is never here after"----

"Perhaps _Mrs._ Aubrey"----

"No, sir; there is only Miss Aubrey at home; my mistress and the
children are gone out into the Park, and Miss Aubrey is writing letters,
or she would have gone with my mistress."

"Perhaps--I could see Miss Aubrey for a moment?" inquired Gammon, with
as matter-of-fact an air as he could assume.

"Certainly, sir--she is in the drawing-room. Will you walk up-stairs?"
said the girl, who of course knew him well, as not an infrequent visitor
at the house. So she led the way up-stairs, he following, and with
somewhat fading color.

"_Mr. Gammon!_" he presently heard, as he stood on the landing, echoed
in the rich and soft voice of Miss Aubrey, who seemed to speak in a tone
of great surprise, in answer to the servant's announcement. "Why, Fanny,
did you not say that neither your master nor mistress was at home?"
Gammon next heard hastily asked in a lower tone by Miss Aubrey, and his
countenance fell a little; for there was a tone of displeasure, or
chagrin, in her voice, especially as she added, "You should have said
that I was _engaged_! However, show him in, Fanny;" and the next moment
Mr. Gammon found himself bowing his way towards Miss Aubrey, with whom,
for the first time in his life, he found himself alone.

She was sitting writing at her desk, before which stood, in a small
flower-glass, a beautiful moss-rose. There was a little air of
negligence in the arrangement of her hair, and her light morning costume
displayed her figure to infinite advantage. There was really something
inexpressibly lovely in her whole appearance, seen, though she was, at
that moment, by Gammon, through the faint mist of displeasure which she
had thrown around herself.

"Good-morning, Mr. Gammon," she commenced, rising a little from her
chair; and sinking again into it, slightly turned it towards him, gazing
at him with some curiosity.

"May I venture to hope, madam, that I am not intruding upon you?" said
he, seating himself in the chair nearest to him.

"My brother always leaves at half-past nine; is he not at the Temple
to-day, Mr. Gammon?" she added a little eagerly--for the first time
observing something unusual in the expression of his countenance.

"I really don't know--madam,--in fact, I have not been there to-day; I
thought it better, perhaps"----He paused for a second.

"I sincerely trust, Mr. Gammon," interrupted Miss Aubrey, slightly
changing color, and looking with great anxiety at her visitor--"that
nothing unpleasant--nothing unfortunate--has happened: do, pray, Mr.
Gammon!" she continued earnestly, turning her chair full towards
him--"for Heaven's sake, tell me!"

"I assure you, madam, upon my honor, that nothing whatever unpleasant
has happened, that I know of, since last we met."

"Oh dear--I was getting so alarmed!" said she, with a faint sigh, her
white hand hastily putting back the curls which were clustering rather
more luxuriantly than usual over her cheek.

"Certainly, madam, you have no occasion to be alarmed; I have, however,
an errand--one to _me_, at least, of inexpressible importance," he
commenced, and in a lower key than that in which he had previously
spoken; and there was a peculiarity in his manner which quite riveted
Miss Aubrey's eye upon his expressive--and now, she saw plainly,
agitated countenance. What can possibly be the matter? thought she, as
she made a courteous but somewhat formal inclination towards him, and
said something about "begging him to proceed."

"I hope, madam, that, comparatively few as have been my opportunities of
becoming acquainted with it, I may venture to express, without offence,
my profound appreciation of your superior character."

"Really, sir," interrupted Miss Aubrey, very anxiously--"you are not
candid with me. I am now certain that you have some unpleasant
communication to make! Do, I entreat of you, Mr. Gammon, give me credit
for a _little_ presence of mind and firmness; let me know the worst, and
be prepared to break it to my brother and sister." Gammon seemed unable
to bear her bright blue eyes fixed upon his own, which he directed to
the floor, while his cheek flushed. Then he looked again at her; and
with an eye which explained all, and drove away the bloom from her
cheek, while it also suspended, for a moment, her breathing.

"Oh, forgive me for an instant--for one moment bear with me, Miss
Aubrey!" continued Gammon, in a voice of low and thrilling pathos--"this
interview agitates me almost to death; it is that which for a thousand
hours of intense--absorbing--agonizing doubts and fears, I have been
looking forward to!" Miss Aubrey sat perfectly silent and motionless,
gazing intently at him, with blanched cheek: he might have been
addressing a Grecian statue. "And now--now that it has at last
arrived--when I feel as if I were breathing a new--a maddening
atmosphere, occasioned by your presence--by the sight of your surpassing
loveliness"----

"Gracious Heaven, sir! what can you mean!" at length interrupted Miss
Aubrey, with a slight start--at the same time slipping her chair a
little farther from Mr. Gammon. "I declare, sir, I do not in the least
understand you," she continued with much energy; but her increasing
paleness showed the effect which his extraordinary conduct had produced
upon her. She made a strong and successful effort, however, to recover
her self-possession.

"I perceive, madam, that you are agitated"----

"I am, sir! Astonished!--Shocked!--I could not have imagined"----

"Madam! madam! at the risk of being deemed unkind--cruel--if I _die_ for
it, I cannot resist telling you that I reverence--I love you to a
degree"----

"Oh, Heavens!" murmured Miss Aubrey, still gazing with an air of
amazement at him. Several times she thought of rising to ring the bell,
and at once get rid of so astounding an interruption and intrusion; but
for several reasons she abstained from doing so, as long as possible.

"It would be ridiculous, sir," said she, at length, with sudden spirit
and dignity, "to affect ignorance of your meaning and intentions; but
may I venture to ask what conduct of mine--what single act of mine--or
word--or look--has ever induced you to imagine--for one moment to
indulge so insane"----

"Alas, madam, that which you could not conceal or control--your
incomparable excellence--your beauty--loveliness--Madam! madam! the mere
sight of your transcendent charms--my soul sank prostrate before you the
first moment that I ever saw you"----

All this was uttered by Gammon in a very low tone, and with passionate
fervor of manner. Miss Aubrey trembled visibly, and had grown very cold.
A little vinaigrette stood beside her--and its stinging stimulating
powers were infinitely serviceable, and at length aided her in making
head against her rebellious feelings.

"I certainly ought to feel flattered, sir," said she, rapidly recovering
herself--"by the high terms in which you are pleased to speak of me--of
one who has not the slightest claim upon your good opinion. I really
cannot conceive what conduct of mine can have led you to imagine that
such an--an--_application_--as this could be successful--or received
otherwise than with astonishment--and, if persisted in--_displeasure_,
Mr. Gammon." This she said in her natural manner, and very pointedly.

"Miss Aubrey--permit me"----said Mr. Gammon, passionately.

"I cannot, sir--I have heard already too much; and I am sure, that when
a lady requests a _gentleman_ to desist from conduct which pains and
shocks her--sir," she added hastily and peremptorily--"I beg you will at
once desist from addressing me in so very improper a strain and manner!"

"Indulge my agonized feelings for one moment, Miss Aubrey," said Gammon,
with desperate energy--"alas! I had suspected--I had feared--that our
respective positions in society would lead you to despise so
comparatively humble and obscure a person in point of station and
circumstances"----

"_Sir!_" exclaimed Kate, magnificently, drawing up her figure to its
utmost height--her manner almost petrifying Gammon, whose last words she
had most unaccountably imagined, at the moment, to amount to a bitter
sarcastic allusion to their fallen fortunes, and diminished personal
consequence in society; but she was quickly undeceived, as he proceeded
fervently--"Yes, madam--your birth--your family connections--your
transcendent mental and personal qualities, shining all the brighter in
the gloom of adversity"----

"I--I--I beg your pardon, sir--I misunderstood you," said Kate,
discovering her error, and coloring violently--"but it is even more
painful to me to listen to the language you are addressing to me. Since
you urge me to it, I beg you to understand, sir, that if by what you
have been saying to me, I am to gather that you are making me an offer
of your addresses--I decline them at once, most peremptorily, as a thing
quite out of the question." The tone and manner in which this was
said--the determination and hauteur perceptible in her striking and
expressive features--blighted all the nascent hopes of Gammon; who
turned perfectly pale, and looked the very image of misery and despair.
The workings of his strongly marked features told of the agony of his
feelings. Neither he nor Miss Aubrey spoke for a few moments. "Alas!
madam," at length he inquired in a tremulous voice, "am I presumptuous,
if I intimate a fear--which I dare hardly own to myself even--that I am
too late--that there _is some more fortunate_"----Miss Aubrey blushed
scarlet.

"Sir," said she, with quick indignant energy, "_I should_ certainly
consider such inquiries--most--_presumptuous_--most offensive--most
unwarrantable!"--and indeed her eye quite shone with indignation. Gammon
gazed at her with piercing intensity, and spoke not.

"You cannot but be aware, sir, that you are greatly taxing my
forbearance--nay, sir, I feel that you are taking a very great liberty
in making any such inquiries or suggestions," continued Miss Aubrey,
proudly, but more calmly; "but, as your manner is unobjectionable and
respectful, I have no difficulty in saying, sir, most unhesitatingly,
that the reason you hint at, is not in the least concerned in the answer
I have given. I have declined your proposals, sir, simply because I
_choose_ to decline them--because I have not, nor ever could have, the
least disposition to entertain them."

Gammon could not, at the moment, determine whether she really had or had
not a pre-engagement.

"Madam, you would bear with me did you but know the exquisite suffering
your words occasion me! Your hopeless tone and manner appear to my soul
to consign it to perdition--to render me perfectly careless about life,"
said Gammon, with irresistible pathos; and Miss Aubrey, as she looked
and listened, in spite of herself pitied him. "I might, perhaps,
establish _some_ claim to your favor, were I at liberty to recount to
you my long unwearied exertions to shield your noble-spirited
brother--nay, all of you--from impending trouble and danger--to avert it
from you."

"We are indeed deeply sensible of your kindness towards us, Mr. Gammon,"
replied Miss Aubrey, with her usual sweetness and fascinating frankness
of manner which _now_ he could not bear to behold.

"Suffer me, Miss Aubrey, but one word more," he continued eagerly,
apprehensive that she was about to check him. "Were you but aware of the
circumstances under which I come to throw myself at your feet--myself,
and all I have--nor is that little, for I am independent of the world
as far as fortune is concerned--I shall soon be in the House of
Commons"--Miss Aubrey exhibited still more unequivocal symptoms of
impatience--"and forever have abandoned the hateful walk in life to
which for the last few years"----

"I suppose I _must_ listen to you, sir, however uselessly to yourself
and disagreeable and painful to me. If, after all I have said, you
choose to persevere," said Miss Aubrey, with calm displeasure----

But Gammon proceeded--"I say, Miss Aubrey, that could you but catch a
glimpse--one momentary glimpse--of the troubles--the dangers which lurk
around you all--infinitely greater than any which you have even yet
experienced, severe and terrible though these have been--which are every
day coming nearer and nearer to you"----

"What _do_ you mean, Mr. Gammon?" interrupted Miss Aubrey, alarmedly.

"--And which, eager and anxious as may, and shall be, my efforts, I may
be unable any longer to avert from you--you would at least appreciate
the pure and disinterested motives with which I set out upon my truly
disastrous mission."

"Once more, Mr. Gammon, I assure you that I feel--that we all of us
feel--a lively gratitude towards you for the great services you have
rendered us; but how _can_ that possibly vary my resolution? Surely, Mr.
Gammon, you will not require me to enter again upon a most
unpleasant"----Gammon heaved a profound sigh--"With regard to your
intimation of the danger which menaces us--alas! we have seen much
trouble--and Providence may design us to see much more--I own, Mr.
Gammon, that I am disturbed by what you have said to me on that
subject."

"I have but one word more to say, madam," said Gammon, in a low
impassioned tone, evidently preparing to sink upon one knee, and to
assume an imploring attitude; on which Miss Aubrey rose from her chair,
and, stepping back a pace or two, said with great resolution, and in an
indignant manner--"If you do not instantly resume your seat, sir, I
shall ring the bell; for you are beginning to take advantage of my
present defenceless position--you are _persecuting_ me, and I will not
suffer it.--Sir, resume your seat, or I summon the servant into the
room--a humiliation I could have wished to spare you."

Her voice was not half so imperative as was her eye. He felt that his
cause was hopeless--he bowed profoundly, and said in a low tone--"I obey
you, madam."

Neither of them spoke for some moments. At length--"I am sure, sir,"
said Miss Aubrey, looking at her watch, "you will forgive me for
reminding you that when you entered I was engaged writing letters"--and
she glanced at her desk--"for which purpose alone it is that I am not
now accompanying my sister and the children."

"I feel too painfully, madam, that I am intruding; but I shall soon
cease to trouble you. Every one has some great bitterness to pass
through at some time or other of his life--and I have this instant
passed through mine," replied Gammon, gloomily. "I will not say that
_the bitterness of death is past_; but I feel that life has henceforth,
as far as I am concerned, nothing worth pursuing."--Miss Aubrey remained
silent while he spoke.--"Before we part, Miss Aubrey, and close, as far
as I--nay, as far, it may be, as both of us are concerned--a very
memorable interview, I have yet one communication to make, to which you
will listen with absorbing interest. It will be made to you in such
confidence as, having heard it, you may consider yourself at liberty
conscientiously to keep from every person upon earth; and I shall leave
it to produce such effect upon you as it may."

"I shall not disguise from you, sir, that your demeanor and your
language alarm me terribly," said Miss Aubrey, peculiarly struck by the
sinister expression of his eye--one quite inconsistent with the sad,
subdued, gentle tone and manner of his address. "I am not _anxious_ to
receive so dark and mysterious a communication as you hint at; and, if
you think proper to make it, I shall use my own discretion as to keeping
it to myself, or mentioning it to any one whom I may choose--of _that_ I
distinctly apprise you, sir. You see that I am agitated; I own it," she
added, dropping her voice, and pressing her left hand against her side;
"but I am prepared to hear anything you may choose to tell me--that I
_ought_ to hear.--Have mercy, sir," she added in a melting voice, "on a
woman whose nerves you have already sufficiently shaken!"

Gammon gazed at her with a bright and passionate eye that would have
drunk her very soul. After a moment's pause--"Madam, it is this," said
he, in a very low tone: "I have the means--I declare in the presence of
Heaven, and on the word and honor of a man"--[Oh, Gammon! Gammon!
Gammon! have you forgotten what occurred between you and your friend
Titmouse one short week ago? Strange, infatuated man! what can you mean?
What if she should take you at your word?]--"_of restoring to your
brother all that he has lost_--THE YATTON PROPERTY, Miss
Aubrey--immediately--permanently--without fear of future disturbance--by
due process of law--openly and most honorably."

"You are trifling with me, sir," gasped Miss Aubrey, faintly, very
faintly--her cheek blanched, and her eye riveted upon that of Gammon.

"Before God, madam, I speak the truth," replied Gammon, solemnly.

Miss Aubrey seemed struggling ineffectually to heave a deep sigh, and
pressed both hands upon her left side, over her heart.

"You are ill, very ill, Miss Aubrey," said Gammon, with alarm, rising
from his chair. She also arose, rather hastily; turned towards the
window, and with feeble trembling hands tried to open it, as if to
relieve her faintness by the fresh air. But it was too late; poor Kate
had been at length overpowered, and Gammon reached her just in time to
receive her inanimate figure, which sank into his arms. Never in his
life had he been conscious of the feelings he that moment experienced,
as he felt her pressure against his arm and knee, and gazed upon her
beautiful but death-like features. He felt as though he had been brought
into momentary contact with an angel. Every fibre within him thrilled.
She moved not; she breathed not. He dared not kiss her lip, her cheek,
her forehead, but raised her soft white hand to his lips, and kissed it
with indescribable tenderness and reverence. Then, after a moment's
pause of irresolution, he gently drew her to the sofa, and laid her
down, supporting her head and applying her vinaigrette, till a
deep-drawn sigh evidenced returning consciousness. Before she had opened
her eyes, or could have become aware of the assistance he had rendered
her, he had withdrawn to a respectful distance, and was gazing at her
with deep anxiety. It was several minutes before her complete
restoration--which, however, the fresh air entering through the windows,
which Gammon hastily threw open, added to the incessant use of her
vinaigrette, greatly accelerated.

"I hardly know, sir," she commenced in a very low and faint tone of
voice, and looking languidly at him, "whether I really heard you say, or
only dreamed that I heard you say, something most extraordinary about
Yatton?"

"I pray you, madam, to wait till you are completely restored; but it was
indeed no dream--it was my voice which you heard utter the words you
allude to; and when you can bear it, I am ready to repeat them as the
words, indeed, of truth and soberness."

"I am ready now, sir--I beg you will say quickly what you have to say,"
replied Miss Aubrey, with returning firmness of tone and calmness of
manner; at the same time passing her snowy handkerchief feebly over her
forehead.

He repeated what he had said before. She listened with increasing
excitement of manner; her emotions at length overmastered her, and she
burst into tears, and wept for some moments unrestrainedly.

Gammon gazed at her in silence; and then, unable to bear the sight of
her sufferings, turned aside his head, and gazed towards the opposite
corner of the room. How little he thought, that the object on which his
eyes accidentally settled, a most splendid harp, had been, only a few
days before, presented to Miss Aubrey by Mr. Delamere!

"What misery, Miss Aubrey, has the sight of your distress occasioned
me!" said Gammon, at length; "and yet why should my communication have
distressed you?"

"I cannot doubt, Mr. Gammon, the truth of what you have so solemnly told
me," she replied in a tremulous voice; "but will you not tell my
unfortunate, my high-minded, my almost broken-hearted brother?" Again
she burst into a fit of weeping.

"Must I--_dare_ I--say it, Miss Aubrey," presently inquired Gammon, in a
broken voice; "can I say it without occasioning what I dread more than I
can express--your displeasure? The use to be made of my power _rests
with you alone_."

She shook her head bitterly and despairingly, and hid her face in her
handkerchief while he proceeded.

"One word--one blessed word from your lips--and before this very day
shall have passed away, I strike down the wretched puppet that at
present defiles Yatton--replace your noble-minded brother there--restore
you all to its delicious shades--Oh, Miss Aubrey, how you will love
them! A thousand times dearer than ever! Every trace of the wretched
idiot now there shall vanish; and let all this come to pass _before_ I
presume to claim"----

"It is impossible, sir," replied Miss Aubrey, with the calmness of
despair, "even were you to place my brother on the throne of England. Is
it not cruel--shocking--that if you know my brother is really
entitled--nay, it is monstrous injustice!--What maybe the means at your
command I know not--I shall not inquire; if to be purchased only on the
terms you mention"--she involuntarily shuddered--"be it so--I cannot
help it; and if my brother and his family must perish because I reject
your addresses"----

"Say not that word, Miss Aubrey! Do not shut out _all_ hope--Recall it!
For God's sake consider the consequences to your brother--to his family!
I tell you that malice and rapacity are at this moment gleaming like
wild wolves within a few paces of you--ready to rush upon you. Did you
but see them as distinctly as I do, you would indeed shudder and
shrink"----

"I do, sir; but we trust in a merciful Providence," replied Miss Aubrey,
clasping together her hands, "and resign ourselves to the will of
Heaven."

"May not Heaven have brought about _this meeting_ between us as a mode
of"----

"Monstrous!" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, in a voice and with a look which for
a moment silenced him.

"It is high time that you should leave me, sir," presently said Miss
Aubrey, determinedly. "I have suffered surely sufficiently already; and
my first answer is also my last. I beg now, sir, that you will retire."

"Madam, you are obeyed," replied Gammon, rising, and speaking in a tone
of sorrowful deference. He felt that his fate was sealed. "I now seem
fully aware, to myself even, of the unwarrantable liberty I have taken,
and solicit your forgiveness--" Miss Aubrey bowed to him loftily.--"I
will not presume to solicit your silence to Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey
concerning the visit I have paid you?" he continued very anxiously.

"I am not in the habit, sir, of concealing _anything_ from my brother
and sister; but I shall freely exercise my own discretion in the
matter."

"Well, madam," said he, preparing to move towards the door, while Miss
Aubrey raised her hand to the bell--"in taking leave of you," he
paused--"let me hope, not forever--receive my solemn assurance, given
before Heaven! that, haughtily as you have repelled my advances this
day, I will yet continue to do all that is in my power to avert the
troubles now threatening your brother--which I fear, however, will be
but of little avail! Farewell, farewell, Miss Aubrey!" he exclaimed; and
was the next moment rapidly descending the stairs. Miss Aubrey, bursting
afresh into tears, threw herself again upon the sofa, and continued long
in a state of excessive agitation. Mr. Gammon walked eastward at a rapid
pace, and in a state of mind which cannot be described. How he loathed
the sight of Saffron Hill, and its disgusting approaches! He merely
looked into the office for a moment, saying that he felt too much
indisposed to attend to business that day; and then betook himself to
his solitary chambers--a thousand times more solitary and cheerless than
ever they had appeared before--where he remained in a sort of revery
for hours. About eleven o'clock that night, he was guilty of a strange
piece of extravagance; for his fevered soul being unable to find rest
anywhere, he set off for Vivian Street, and paced up and down it, with
his eye constantly fixed upon Mr. Aubrey's house; he saw the lights
disappear from the drawing-room, and reappear in the bedrooms: them also
he watched out--still he lingered in the neighborhood, which seemed to
have a sort of fatal fascination about it; and it was past three o'clock
before, exhausted in mind and body, he regained his chamber, and
throwing himself upon the bed, slept from mere weariness.

Let us now turn to a man of a very different description--Mr. Aubrey.
He had spent nearly a year in the real study of the law; during
which time I have not the least hesitation in saying that he had
made--notwithstanding all his dreadful drawbacks--at least five times
the progress that is generally made by even the most successful of those
who devote themselves to the legal profession. He had, moreover, during
the same period, produced five or six exceedingly able political
dissertations, and several important contributions to historical
literature; and the reader will not be surprised to learn, that such
exertions as these, and such anxieties as were his, had told visibly on
the appearance of Mr. Aubrey. He was very thin; his cheek had lost its
color; his eye was oppressed; his spirits had lost their buoyancy,
except in the few intervals which he was permitted, by his harassing
labors, of domestic enjoyment. He still bore up, however, against his
troubles with an unyielding resolution; feeling that Providence had
called upon him to do his uttermost, and await the result with patience
and faith. Nothing had occurred during this long interval to brighten
his prospects--to diminish his crushing load of liability by a hair's
weight. But his well-disciplined mind now stood him in noble stead, and
enabled him to realize a daily consciousness of advancement in the
pursuits to which he had devoted himself. Well indeed may it be said,
that there is no grander spectacle for angels or men, than a great mind
struggling with adversity. To us, indeed, it is consolatory,
encouraging, ennobling. Therefore, O Aubrey! do we now continue to
contemplate you with profound interest, nor the less, because we
perceive the constant presence with thee of _One_ whose mighty
assistance is dependent _upon thy confidence in it_. Hope ever,
therefore, and struggle on!

The reader may imagine the alarm occasioned Mr. Aubrey on his return
from the Temple on the evening of the day on which Gammon had paid his
remarkable visit to Miss Aubrey, which I have been describing, by the
sight of the troubled countenances of his wife and sister. Mrs. Aubrey
had returned home within about half an hour after Gammon's leaving
Vivian Street, and to her Miss Aubrey instantly communicated the
extraordinary proposal which he had made to her, all, in fact, that had
passed between them--with the exception of the astounding information
concerning the alleged possibility of their restoration to Yatton. The
two ladies had, indeed, determined on concealing the whole affair from
Mr. Aubrey--at all events for the present; but their perceptible
agitation increasing as he questioned them concerning the cause of it,
rendered suppression impossible, and they told him frankly (excepting
only the matter above mentioned) the singular and most embarrassing
incident which had happened in his absence. Blank amazement was
succeeded by vivid indignation in Mr. Aubrey, as soon as he had heard of
this attempt to take advantage of their circumstances; and for several
hours he was excessively agitated. In vain they tried to soothe him; in
vain did Kate throw her arms fondly round him, and implore him, for all
their sakes, to take no notice to Mr. Gammon of what had happened; in
vain did she protest that she would give him instant intelligence of any
future attempt by that person to renew his absurd and presumptuous
offer; in vain did they both remind him, with great emotion, of the
fearful power over all of them which was in Mr. Gammon's hands. Aubrey
was peremptory and inflexible, and, moreover, frank and explicit; and
told them, on quitting home the next morning, that, though they might
rely on his discretion and temper, he had resolved to communicate that
day, either personally or by letter, with Mr. Gammon; not only
peremptorily forbidding any renewal of his proposals, but also
requesting him to discontinue his visits in Vivian Street.

"Oh, Charles! Charles! be punctually home by six!" exclaimed they, as he
embraced them both at parting, and added, bursting afresh into tears,
"do consider the agony--the dreadful suspense we shall be in all day!"

"I will return by six, to a minute! Don't fear for _me_!" he replied
with a smile--which, however, instantly disappeared, as soon as he had
quitted their presence.

Old Mr. Quirk was the next morning, about ten o'clock, over head and
ears in business of all kinds--and sadly missed the clear-headed and
energetic Gammon; so, fearing that that gentleman's indisposition must
still continue, inasmuch as there were no symptoms of his coming to the
office as usual, he took off his spectacles, locked his room door, in
order to prevent any one by any possibility looking on any of the
numerous letters and papers lying on his table; and set off to make a
call upon Mr. Gammon--whose countenance, flushed and harassed, strongly
corroborated his representations concerning the state of his health.
Still, he said, he could attend to any business which Mr. Quirk was
prepared then to mention; whereupon Mr. Quirk took from his pocket a
piece of paper, drew on his glasses, and put questions to him from a
number of memoranda which he had made for the purpose. Gammon's answers
were brief, pointed, and explicit, on all matters mentioned, as might
have been expected from one of his great ability and energy--but his
muddle-headed companion could not carry away a single clear idea of what
had been so clearly told him; and without avowing the fact, of which he
felt, however, a painful consciousness, simply determined to do nothing
that he could possibly avoid doing, till Mr. Gammon should have made his
reappearance at the office, and reduced the little chaos there into
something like form and order.

Before he quitted Mr. Gammon, that gentleman quietly and easily led the
conversation towards the subject of the various outstanding debts due to
the firm.

"Ah, drat it!" quoth the old gentleman, briskly--"the heaviest, you
know, is--eh?--I suppose, however," he added apprehensively, and
scratching his head, "I mustn't name _that_--I mean that fellow Aubrey's
account--without our coming to words."

"Why--stay! stay," said Mr. Gammon, with a gravely thoughtful air--"I
don't see _that_, either, Mr. Quirk. Forbearance has its limits. It may
be abused, Mr. Quirk."

"Ecod! I should think so!" quoth Mr. Quirk, eagerly--"and I know who's
abused _somebody's_ forbearance--eh, Gammon?"

"I understand you, my dear sir," replied Gammon, with a sigh--"I fear I
must plead no longer for him--I have gone already, perhaps, much farther
than my duty to the firm warranted."

"It's a heavy balance, Gammon--a very heavy balance, £1,446 odd, to be
outstanding so long--he agreed to pay interest on't--didn't he, eh?--But
really something ought to be done in it; and--come, Gammon, as you have
had _your_ turn so long, now comes mine!--Tip him over to _me_."

"I should be very sorry to distress him, poor devil!"

"Distress him? Our bill must be paid. D--n him! why don't he pay his
debts? I pay mine--you pay yours--he must pay his."

"Certainly. By the way," said Gammon, suddenly, "if you were to take
bold and decided steps, his friends would undoubtedly come forward and
relieve him."

"Ay! ay!--What think you of three days--give him three days to turn
about in?--There he's living all the while in a d--d fine house at the
West End, like a gentleman--looks down, I'll be sworn, on us poor
attorneys already, beggar as he is, because he's coming to the bar. Now
mind, Gammon, no nonsense! I won't stand your coming in again as you did
before--if I write--honor between thieves! eh?"

"I pledge my honor to you, my dear sir, that I will interfere no more;
the law must take its course."

"That's it!" said Mr. Quirk, rubbing his hands gleefully; "I'll tip him
a tickler before he's a day older that shall wake him up--ah, ha!"

"You will do me one favor, Mr. Quirk, I am sure," said Mr. Gammon, with
that civil but peremptory manner of his, which invariably commanded
Quirk's assent to his suggestions--"you will insert a disclaimer in the
letter of its emanating from _me_--or being with my consent."

"Oh lud, yes! yes! anything."

"Nay--rather _against my wish_, you know--eh? Just for appearance's
sake--as I have always appeared so infernally civil to the man, till
now."

"Will you draw it up yourself? And then, so as the _other_ matter's all
right--no flinching--stick in as much palaver, Gammon!--aha!--as you
like!" replied Quirk; who, as the proposal involved only a greater
measure of discourtesy on _his_ part, without any sacrifice of his
_interest_, regarded it with perfect indifference. He took his leave of
Gammon in better spirits than those which he had carried with him. It
having been thus determined on by the partners, that within a day or
two's time, Mr. Aubrey should be required to pay the whole balance,
under penalty of an arrest--Gammon, on being left alone, folded his arms
as he sat beside his breakfast-table--and meditated on the probable
results of this his first hostile move against Mr. Aubrey. "I wonder
whether she's told him," thought he, with a slight palpitation--which
was somewhat increased by a pretty sharp knock at his outer door. The
color suddenly deserted his cheek as he started from his seat,
scattering on the floor nearly a dozen unopened letters which had been
lying at his elbow, on the table: and he stood still for a moment to
subdue a little of his agitation, so as to enable him to present himself
with some show of calmness before the visitor whom he felt perfectly
certain that he should see on opening the door. He was right. The next
minute beheld him ushering into his room, with a surprising degree of
self-possession, Mr. Aubrey, whose countenance showed embarrassment and
agitation.

"I have called upon you, Mr. Gammon," commenced Aubrey, taking the seat
to which Mr. Gammon, with great courtesy, motioned him, and then resumed
his own, "in consequence of your visit yesterday in Vivian Street--of
your surprising interview with my sister--your most unexpected,
extraordinary proposal to her."

Mr. Gammon listened respectfully, with an air of earnest attention,
evidently not intending to make any reply.

"It cannot surprise you, sir, that I should have been made acquainted
with it immediately on my return home yesterday evening. It was
undoubtedly my sister's _duty_ to do so; but she did it, I am bound to
acknowledge to you, sir, with great reluctance, as a matter of
exquisitely painful delicacy. Sir, she has told me all that passed
between you."

"I cannot presume, Mr. Aubrey, to find fault with anything Miss Aubrey
may have thought proper to do; she _cannot_ do wrong," replied Gammon,
calmly, though Mr. Aubrey's last words had occasioned him lively anxiety
as to the extent of Miss Aubrey's communications to her brother. He
observed Mr. Aubrey's eyes fixed upon him steadfastly, and saw that he
was laboring under much excitement. "If I have done anything calculated
to inflict the slightest pain upon a lady for whom I have so
profound"--he saw the color mounting into Mr. Aubrey's cheek, and a
sterner expression appearing in his eye--"a respect, or upon _you_, or
any of your family, I am distressed beyond measure."

"I perfectly appreciate, Mr. Gammon, the position in which we stand with
regard to each other," said Mr. Aubrey, with forced calmness. "Though I
am fearfully changed in respect of fortune, I am not a whit changed--_we
are none of us changed_," he continued proudly, "in respect of personal
feelings and character."

He paused: Gammon spoke not. Presently Mr. Aubrey resumed--"I am, as we
are all, very deeply sensible of the obligation which you have conferred
upon us, and at the same time feel, that we are, to a great extent,
placed at your mercy."

"Pray--I beg, Mr. Aubrey, that you will not speak in a strain which
really hurts my feelings," interrupted Gammon, earnestly; "and which
nothing on, my part has justified, nor can justify."

"Sir," continued Mr. Aubrey, firmly, "I meant nothing in the least
calculated to wound your feelings, but merely to express my own; and
let me, Mr. Gammon, without the least reserve or circumlocution, inform
you that both my sister and I have felt vivid dissatisfaction at your
conduct of yesterday; and I have deemed it expedient to lose no time in
informing you that your proposals are utterly out of the question, and
can never be entertained, under any circumstances, for one moment."

Had Aubrey been, instead of the mere pauper he really was, and in the
presence of one whom he knew to be able to cast him instantly into
prison, at that moment in the position he had formerly occupied, of
wealth and greatness, he could not have spoken with an air of more
dignified determination, and even _hauteur_: which Gammon perceived, and
fully appreciated.

"I am undoubtedly aware, sir, of the disparity between Miss Aubrey and
myself in point of position," said he, coldly.

"I have said nothing of the kind that I am aware of, nor would I, on any
account, say anything offensive to you, Mr. Gammon; but it is my duty to
speak explicitly and decisively. I therefore now beg you to understand
that your overtures must not, in any shape, or at any time, be renewed;
and this I must insist upon without assigning or suggesting any reason
whatever."

Gammon listened attentively and silently.

"I presume, Mr. Gammon, that I cannot be misunderstood?" added Mr.
Aubrey, with a very perceptibly increased peremptoriness of manner.

"It would be difficult to misunderstand what you say, sir," replied
Gammon, in whose dark bosom Mr. Aubrey's words had, as it were, stung
and roused the serpent PRIDE--which might have been seen with crest
erect, and glaring eyes. But Mr. Gammon's external manner was calm and
subdued.

"It gives me pain to be forced to add, Mr. Gammon," continued Mr.
Aubrey, "that after what has taken place, we all of us feel--that--it
will be better for you to discontinue your visits at my house. I am sure
your own sense of delicacy will appreciate the necessity which exists
for such a suggestion on my part?"

"I perfectly understand you, Mr. Aubrey," replied Gammon, in the same
grave and guarded manner which he had preserved throughout their
interview. "I shall offer no apology, sir, for conduct which I do not
feel to require one. I conceive that I had a perfect right to make, with
all due deference and respect, the offer which it appears has given you
so much offence; for reasons, it may be, which justify you, but which I
cannot speculate upon, nor do I wish to do so. It is impossible ever to
see Miss Aubrey without becoming sensible of her loveliness, both of
person and character. I have paid them homage: for the rest, the issue
is simply--unfortunate. While I may not feel disposed, even if inclined,
to disregard your strict and solemn injunctions, I take leave to say
that my feelings towards Miss Aubrey cannot alter; and if in no _other_
way they can be gratified, there is yet _one_ which"--here he looked
greatly moved, and changed color--"yet remains open to me, to exhibit my
regard for her in a tenfold anxiety to preserve her--to preserve all of
you, Mr. Aubrey, from the approach of difficulty and danger. That much
Miss Aubrey may have also told to you, of what passed between us
yesterday." He paused--from emotion apparently; but he was only
considering intently whether he should endeavor to _ascertain_ if Mr.
Aubrey had been put by his sister in possession of his--Gammon's, last
communication to her; and then, however that might be, whether he should
himself break the matter to Mr. Aubrey. But he decided both questions in
the negative, and proceeded, with a little excitement of manner--"There
_are_ dangers menacing you, I grieve to say, Mr. Aubrey, of the most
serious description, which I may possibly be unable to avert from you! I
fear I am losing that hold _upon others_ which has enabled me hitherto
to save you from rapacity and oppression! I regret to say that I can
_answer_ for others no longer; but all that man can do, still will I do.
I have been most bitterly--most fearfully disappointed; but you shall
ever find me a man of my word--of as high and rigid honor, perhaps,
even, Mr. Aubrey, as yourself"--he paused, and felt that he had made an
impression on his silent auditor--"and I hereby pledge myself, in the
presence of God, that so far as in _me_ lies, there shall not a hair of
any of your heads be touched." Again he paused. "I wish, Mr. Aubrey, you
knew the pressure which has been for some time upon me--nay, even this
very morning"----he cast a melancholy and reluctant eye towards the
letters which he had gathered up, and which he had placed beside him on
the breakfast-table--"I have received a letter--here it is--I know the
handwriting; I almost dread to open it." Mr. Aubrey changed color.

"I am at a loss to know to what, _in particular_, you are alluding, Mr.
Gammon?" he interrupted anxiously.

"I will not at present say more on the subject; I devoutly hope my
negotiations may be successful, and that the affair may not for many
months, or even years, be _forced_ upon your attention! Still, _were_ I
to do so, one effect, at least, it would have--to satisfy you of my
honorable and _disinterested_ motives in the offer which I presumed to
make Miss Aubrey."

"Well, sir," replied Mr. Aubrey, with a melancholy air, and sighing
deeply, "I can only place my trust in Providence--and I _do_. I have
suffered much already; and if it be the will of Heaven that I should
suffer more, I hope it will be proved that I have not suffered
already--_in vain_!"

"Mr. Aubrey," said Gammon, gazing at him with a brightening eye, "my
very soul owns the sublime presence of VIRTUE, in your person! It is
exalting--it is ennobling--merely to be permitted to witness so heroic
an example of constancy as you exhibit!"--He paused, and for some
moments there was silence--"You do not distrust me, Mr. Aubrey?" said
Gammon, at length, with a confident air.

"No, Mr. Gammon!" replied Mr. Aubrey, eying him steadfastly. "I'm not
aware that I ever had any reason for doing so."

Shortly afterwards he took his departure; and as he bent his steps
slowly, and with thoughtful air, towards the Temple, he saw one or two
things, on his own part, during his interview with Gammon, to
regret--namely, his sternness and pride; but nothing on the part of
Gammon, that had not been admirable. Could Mr. Aubrey, however, but have
seen the satanic smile which settled upon Mr. Gammon's features, as soon
as, after cordially shaking his hand, he calmly shut the door upon Mr.
Aubrey, it might have occasioned some few misgivings as to Mr. Gammon's
sincerity. He resumed his seat, and meditated upon their recent
interview. Almost the first glance which he had caught of Mr. Aubrey's
countenance, and the very first tones of his voice which had fallen on
Gammon's ear, had inspired him with a deadly animosity against poor
Aubrey, whose pride Gammon resolved to trample upon and crush into the
dust. He was acquainted with the state of Aubrey's little finances,
almost to a pound; for Aubrey had, under the circumstances, felt it even
a duty to be frank with him upon that subject. He turned over in his
mind, with great anxiety, the matter of the two promissory notes for
five thousand pounds each, which he held in his hands, and which would
be the best mode of setting into motion, _but with_ _the hands of
another_, those two dreadful instruments of torture and
oppression--which, judiciously applied, might have the effect of
humbling the pride and breaking the determination of Aubrey and of his
sister. Long he considered the subject, in every point of view; and at
length--"Ay, that will do!" said he to himself aloud; sighed, smiled,
and gently tapped his fingers upon his ample forehead. Shortly
afterwards, having ordered his laundress to take away the breakfast
things, he took pen, ink, and paper, and sketched off the following
draft of a letter, to be copied by Mr. Quirk, and signed in the name of
the firm, and sent, Gammon finally determined, early in the ensuing
week:--

                                         _"Saffron Hill, 9th July 18--._

     "DEAR SIR,--Owing to a most serious and unexpected pecuniary outlay
     which we are called upon to make, we feel ourselves compelled to
     avail ourselves of whatever resources lie within our reach. Having
     been disappointed in several quarters, we are obliged to remind you
     of the heavy balance we have against you of £1,446, 14s. 6d. You
     must be aware of the length of time during which it has been
     standing; and trust you will forgive us if we at length apprise you
     that it is absolutely impossible for us to allow of any more delay.
     Unless, therefore, the whole of the above balance, or at least
     £1,000 of it, be paid within three days of the date hereof, we
     regret to inform you we have finally made up our minds to let the
     law take its usual course. We feel the less hesitation in saying
     thus much, because we are persuaded that, with a little exertion,
     you might long ago have liquidated this heavy balance, or the
     greater part thereof." (Mr. Gammon wrote as nearly in the peculiar
     style of Mr. Quirk as he could.)

     "In writing thus, Messrs. Quirk and Snap feel it only due to their
     partner, Mr. Gammon, to add that he is no party to this
     application. Messrs. Q. and S. have felt, however, in making it,
     that the interests of the firm have already suffered long enough,
     through their deference to the personal wishes and feelings of
     _one_ of the members of the firm; and but for whom, their heavy
     balance would have been called for long ago, and, no doubt, in due
     course discharged.

     "We regret being unable to vary or depart from the determination
     above expressed; and most sincerely hope your resources are of that
     nature that we shall be spared the unpleasantness of commencing
     legal proceedings.

                                    "And we remain, dear sir,
                                          "Yours most respectfully,
                                                "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP.

     "CHARLES AUBREY, Esquire,
          "Vivian Street."

Exactly on the seventh day from that on which Mr. Gammon had made his
ill-omened advances towards Miss Aubrey, did the above dreadful and
heartless letter reach its destination--being delivered into Mr.
Aubrey's hands while he was intently perusing a very heavy set of
papers, which, at his request, Mr. Weasel had allowed him to take home.
The painful scene which ensued I shall spare the reader--only mentioning
that poor Miss Aubrey became almost frantic, treating herself as the
sole occasion of this disaster. That very morning, at breakfast, had he
been talking of selling out, of their precious remnant in the funds, the
sum of £105, to enable him to become a pupil with Mr. Crystal, at the
suggestion of the Attorney-General.

What was to be done in this fearful emergency none of them knew--except
consenting to an immediate sale of all their plate, books, and
furniture. Their affliction, indeed, knew no bounds. Even Mr. Aubrey,
though for a long time he bore up heroically, was at length overcome by
the agonies of the dear beings whose ruin was involved in his own.

Had not Gammon been prompt in his vengeance? So thought they all.

What _was_ to be done? A word will suffice to explain Mr. Aubrey's
position fully. It will be recollected, that about a twelvemonth
before, he had been left in possession of a balance of £1,063, after
paying the sum of £4,000 to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, Messrs.
Runnington, and Mr. Parkinson, in the way which has been already
mentioned. Since then, by his incessant exertions, he had realized the
sum of £150 by his contributions to literary journals; and, by means of
a severe and systematic economy, this sum, together with about £200
taken from his store of £1,063, had sufficed to cover their whole year's
expenditure. 'Twas impossible to carry economy farther than they did,
without, poor souls, positive injury to their health, and stinting the
little children, as Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey often said to each other when
alone, with tears and sighs of anguish.

Alas! misfortune followed him like a bloodhound, let him turn his steps
whithersoever he might! Naturally anxious to make the most of his little
store of £1,063, so long as any considerable portion of it could be
spared from their immediate personal necessities, he looked about in all
directions for some safe and profitable investment, which might produce
him a little more income than could be derived from the funds. He
cautiously avoided having the slightest, connection with any of the
innumerable joint-stock speculations then afloat, and of which he saw
distinctly the mischievous and ruinous tendency; and this, moreover, in
spite of the artful occasional representations of Mr. Gammon. Having
consulted his banker, and also a member of the House of Commons--one of
the city members--a man of immense wealth, and great mercantile
experience and sagacity, and with whom he had been intimate while in the
House--confirmed by their approval, and also that of Mr. Weasel and
Messrs. Runnington, all of whom poor Aubrey anxiously consulted
concerning the disposal of this his little ALL; about six weeks after
the period of his settlement with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, he
invested five hundred pounds in the purchase of a particular foreign
stock. Safe and promising as it appeared, however, at the very moment
when it was in the highest repute, with capitalists of all descriptions
both at home and abroad--from scarce any assignable reason, but forming
one of the many unaccountable instances of fluctuation to which property
of that kind is proverbially liable--Aubrey had hardly held his scrip
for a month, when--alas!--to his dismay, he found the stock
falling--falling--falling; down, down, down, it went, till his scrip was
so much waste paper! His loss was irretrievable. The wealthy member whom
he had consulted, lost nearly one hundred and twenty thousand pounds,
and was driven to the very verge of ruin. Mr. Weasel even--caution
personified, in dealing with the little accumulation of his hard
earnings--lost upwards of a thousand pounds; and Mr. Runnington, about
double that sum. It required a great stretch of fortitude on the part of
Mr. Aubrey to sustain this severe and sudden blow with anything like
equanimity.--You should have seen and heard Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey,
on that occasion, in order fully to appreciate the rich and melting
tenderness of woman's love, sympathy, and fortitude.

This catastrophe--for surely such it was--had left him about £350 only
in the funds, and in his banker's hands a little balance of some fifty
or sixty pounds to meet his current expenses. The above amount, at the
time when Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's letter reached him, had been
necessarily diminished to about £290; which was positively all the money
he had in the world, to save himself, and those dependent on him, from
absolute destitution. Yet he was now peremptorily called upon, within
three days' time, to pay the sum of £1,446, 14s. 6d.

He hurried off, early the next morning, in consternation, to Messrs.
Runnington. Mr. Runnington, with a heavy heart and a gloomy countenance,
set off instantly, alone, to the office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap. He saw Mr. Gammon, who told him, with a well-dissembled air of
disgust, to go in to Mr. Quirk, or Mr. Snap. He did so, and found them
inexorable. Mr. Quirk doggedly told Mr. Runnington that he had been out
of pocket long enough, and would not be fooled by one of his own
partners any longer. Mr. Runnington quitted them, fairly at his wits'
end; and, on his return, told Mr. Aubrey, whom he had left at his office,
that he had done, and could do, "nothing with the vultures of Saffron
Hill." Mr. Runnington felt that his unhappy client, Mr. Aubrey, was far
too critically situated with respect to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap,
to admit of his threatening, on Mr. Aubrey's behalf, to refer their
exorbitant and monstrous bill to taxation. He knew not, in fact, what
suggestion to offer--what scheme to devise--to extricate Mr. Aubrey from
his present dreadful dilemma. As for applying for pecuniary assistance
from friends, Mr. Aubrey's soul revolted at the bare thought.
What--borrow! Overwhelmed as he already was, it would be indeed grossly
unprincipled! Was not one alone of his generous friends at that moment
under a liability on his behalf of more than ten thousand pounds! No;
with gloomy composure he felt that, at last, _his hour was come_; that a
prison wall must soon intervene between him--poor broken-hearted
soul!--and the dear beloved beings from whom, as yet, he had never been
once separated--no! not for one moment deprived of blessed intercourse
and communion with them--his wife--Kate--his unconscious little
children----

Kate, however, got desperate; and, unknown to her brother, though with
the full privity of his weeping wife, wrote off a long--a heart-rending
letter to good old Lady Stratton, whose god-daughter she was, telling
her everything. Kate sat up half the night writing that letter, and it
was blistered with her tears. She took it very early in the morning,
herself, to the post-office, and she and Mrs. Aubrey awaited the issue
with the most trembling and fearful solicitude.

I have hardly heart to recount the events which followed upon poor
Kate's adventure; but they form a striking exemplification of the
mysterious manner in which frequently Providence, for its own awful and
wise purposes, sees fit to accumulate troubles and sorrows upon the
virtuous.

Old Lady Stratton had been for some months in very feeble health, and
the receipt of Kate's letter occasioned her infinite distress. It will
be remembered that she had long before effected a policy of insurance
upon her life for £15,000, always intending to bequeath it as a little
portion to poor Kate. She had many months--in fact, nearly a year and a
half before--given the necessary instructions to her solicitor, good Mr.
Parkinson of Grilston, for making her will, so as to carry into effect
her kind intentions towards Kate; bequeathing also legacies of £500
a-piece to each of Mr. Aubrey's little children. How it came to pass,
however, I scarcely know--except by referring it to that sad
superstitious weakness which makes people often procrastinate the
execution of so all-important an instrument as a will; but at the time
when Kate's letter arrived, that will had not been executed, but still
lay at Mr. Parkinson's office. Feeling greatly indisposed, however,
shortly after she had received Miss Aubrey's letter, she sent off an
express for Mr. Parkinson to attend with her will; and a few minutes
afterwards her attendants found it necessary to send off another express
for her physician, Dr. Goddart. Before drawing a check for the sum of
£700, or £800, which she intended instantly to place at Mr. Aubrey's
disposal, she awaited Mr. Parkinson's return, that he--who managed all
her affairs--might inform her of the exact balance then at her banker's.
He was absent from Grilston when the express arrived; but he was
followed, and about seven o'clock that evening entered Lady Stratton's
residence, carrying with him her will, ready prepared for execution. His
chief clerk also accompanied him, lest, by any possibility, a _witness_
should be wanting. The countenances of the domestics warned him that
there was not one moment to be lost; and he hastened at once into Lady
Stratton's bedchamber. There she lay, venerable old lady, propped up by
pillows--her long white hair partially visible from under her cap. A
hasty whisper from Dr. Goddart apprised him of the very critical
situation of Lady Stratton. Writing materials stood ready prepared in
the room against Mr. Parkinson's arrival. She recognized him on his
passing the foot of the bed, and in a feeble voice whispered--_"My
will!--my will!"_

[Oh, hasten! delay not an instant, Mr. Parkinson! If you did but know
what depends on your movements--could you but at this moment--oh
me!--could you but catch a glimpse of the scene passing in Vivian
Street!--Give her the pen, Mr. Parkinson--guide her hand--place it upon
the paper.]

_But it was too late._ Before the pen could be placed within her
fingers, those fingers had become incapable of holding it--for Lady
Stratton at that moment experienced the paralytic seizure which Dr.
Goddart had been dreading for three or four hours before. Alas, alas! 't
was all useless: pen, ink, and paper were removed. She lingered till
about nine o'clock the next morning, when, in the presence of Mr.
Parkinson, who had not quitted the room for one instant, death released
the venerable sufferer. She had thus died _intestate_; and her next of
kin became entitled to her property--which consisted of personalty only.
Had this event happened but two years before, Mr. Aubrey and Kate would
have been Lady Stratton's only next of kin: but now--alas!--Mr. Titmouse
was also one of her next of kin, and entitled, as such, to a THIRD of
all that which had been destined to the Aubreys alone!--In what a
position were the Aubreys now placed? Titmouse would directly insist on
his right to administer, in preference to Aubrey--and would succeed in
establishing his right; for was he not equally near of kin, and moreover
the creditor, to a very large extent, of Mr. Aubrey--who was, besides,
utterly insolvent? What, then, would be the consequences of this move on
the part of Titmouse? He would get into his possession all the property
of Lady Stratton--and though not entitled to withhold payment to Mr.
Aubrey and his sister of the shares due to them, he might interpose many
obstacles in the way of their recovering, and avail himself of their
insisting upon _their_ rights, as a pretext for his insisting on _his_
rights against Mr. Aubrey, even to the uttermost extremity!--All these,
and many other similar considerations, passed quickly in review before
the troubled mind of Mr. Parkinson. His fears were soon realized by
events. Before the venerable deceased had been laid in Yatton
churchyard, not far from her, beloved friend, Mrs. Aubrey, who had
preceded her by a few months only, Mr. Parkinson received a letter from
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, as the solicitors of Mr. Titmouse,
giving him formal notice of the title of their client, and requesting
Mr. Parkinson to lose no time in making an inventory of the effects of
her Ladyship, to whom Mr. Titmouse intended to administer immediately.
Mr. Gammon himself went down, and arrived the day after the funeral.
Guess his delighted astonishment on discovering the windfall which had
come to his client, Mr. Titmouse, in the policy of £15,000, the
existence of which they had, of course, never dreamed of!

But there was another discovery, which occasioned him not a little
excitement, as his flushed cheek and suspended breath testified--alas!
poor Aubrey's BOND for £2,000, _with interest at five per cent_!--an
instrument which poor Lady Stratton, having always intended to destroy,
latterly imagined that she had actually done so. It had, however, got
accidentally mingled with other papers, which had found their way, in
the ordinary course, to Mr. Parkinson, and who was himself ignorant of
its existence, since it lay folded in a letter addressed to Lady
Stratton, till it turned up while he was sorting the papers, in
obedience to the request of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. He turned
pale and red by turns as he held the accursed document in his fingers;
probably, thought he, no one on earth but himself knew of its existence;
_and_--_and_--he knew what the _deceased_ would have done--but his sense
of duty prevailed! Of course the party entitled to sue for the principal
money secured by it, together with all arrears of interest which might
be due upon it, was now Mr. TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE!

--Surely it is hard to imagine a more dismal and wanton freak of fortune
than this--as far, at least, as concerned poor Kate Aubrey.




CHAPTER V.


     "Fly! Fly!--For God's sake fly! Lose not one moment of the precious
     respite which, by incredible efforts, I have contrived to secure
     you--a respite of but a few hours--and wrung from heartlessness and
     rapacity. In justice, much injured man! to yourself--to all you
     hold dear upon earth--to the precious interests intrusted to your
     keeping, and involved in your destruction--again I say _Fly_! Quit
     the country, if it be but for never so short a time, till you or
     your friends shall have succeeded in arranging your disordered
     affairs. Regard this hasty and perhaps incoherent note, in what
     light you please--but I tell you it comes, _in sacred confidence_,
     from a firm and inalienable friend, whose present desperate
     exertions in your behalf you will one day perhaps be able to
     appreciate. Once more I conjure you to fly!--From other and greater
     dangers than you at present apprehend. _I see the rack preparing
     for you!_--Will you stay to be tortured?--and in the presence of
     the incomparable beings who--but my feelings overpower me! Indeed,
     Mr. Aubrey, if you disregard this intimation through weak fears as
     to its writer's sincerity, or a far weaker, and a wild, notion of
     Quixotic honor and heroism--remember, in the moment of being
     overwhelmed, _this note_--and then do justice to its writer.--Your
     faithful, unhappy, _distrusted_ friend,

                                                                 "O. G.

     "P.S.--For God's sake burn, or otherwise destroy, this letter, as
     soon as you shall have read it."

Such was the letter which got into Mr. Aubrey's hands just as the time
which had been fixed by Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, for payment of
their bill, was expiring, and which occasioned him, as may be easily
imagined, dreadful disquietude. It had found him in a state of the
deepest depression--but yet vigorously striving to preserve, in the
presence of his wife and sister, a semblance of composure and
cheerfulness. More to pacify them than to satisfy himself, he had walked
about town during the two preceding days till nearly dropping with
exhaustion, in fruitless quest of those who might be disposed to advance
him a thousand pounds on his own personal security, and on terms he
scarce cared how exorbitant, to free him, at all events for a while,
from his present exigency. All had been, however, in vain--indeed he had
had no hopes from the first. And what was then to be done? His soul
seemed dying away within him. At times he almost lost all consciousness
of his situation, and of what was passing around him. It appeared to be
the will of Heaven that his misfortunes should press him down, as it
were, by inches into the dust, and crush him. Those there were, he well
knew, who needed but to be apprised of his circumstances, to step
forward and generously relieve him from his difficulties. But where was
all that to end? What real good could it serve? Awfully involved as he
was already--one, alone, of his friends being at that moment under a
liability which must be discharged within a few months, of nearly
_eleven thousand pounds_--was he to place others in a similar situation?
What earthly prospect had he of ever repaying them? Lamentable as was
his position, his soul recoiled from the bare thought. But then came
before his anguished eye, his wife--his sister--his children; and he
flung himself, in an ecstasy, on his knees, remaining long
prostrate--and, for a while, _the heaven that was over his head seemed
to be brass, and the earth that was under him, iron_. His heart might be
wrung, however, and his spirit heavy and darkened; but no extent or
depth of misery could cause him to forget those principles of honor and
integrity by which all his life had been regulated. He resolved,
therefore, to submit to the stroke apparently impending over him, with
calmness, as to inevitable ruin; nor would he hear of any further
applications to his friends, which, indeed, he felt would be only
encouragement to those who held him in thraldom, to renew their
exactions, when they found each succeeding pressure successful. Poor
Kate had told him, as soon as her letter had been put into the post,
with trembling apprehension as to the consequences, of her application
to Lady Stratton; but did she think her fond broken-hearted brother
could chide her? He looked at her for a moment, with quivering lip and
eyes blinded with tears--and then wrung her hand, simply expressing a
hope, that, since the step _had_ been taken, it might be, in some
measure at least, successful.

Mr. Gammon's letter, as I have already intimated, filled Mr. Aubrey with
inexpressible alarm. Again and again he read it over with increasing
agitation, and at the same time uncertain as to its true character and
import--as to the real motive and object of its writer. Was he guilty of
the duplicity which Mrs. Aubrey and Kate so vehemently imputed to him?
Was he actuated by revenge? Or was he, as represented by Mr. Quirk's
letter, overpowered by his partners, and still sincere in his wishes to
shield Mr. Aubrey from their rapacity? Or was Mr. Gammon suggesting
_flight_ only as a snare? Was Mr. Aubrey to be seduced into an act
warranting them in proceeding to instant extremities against him? What
could be the other matters so darkly alluded to in the letter? Were they
the two promissory notes of five thousand pounds each, which he had
deposited with Mr. Gammon, who at length was peremptorily required by
Mr. Titmouse to surrender them up, and permit them to be put in suit?
They were payable _on demand_--he shuddered! Might it be, that Titmouse
was desperately in want of money, and had therefore overpowered the
scruples of Gammon, and disregarded the sacred pledge under which he
assured Titmouse the notes had been given? Mr. Aubrey rejoiced that Mr.
Gammon's letter had been placed in his hands by the servant when alone
in his study, whither he had gone to write a note to Mr. Runnington; and
resolved not to apprise Mrs. Aubrey and Kate of its arrival. The
_fourth_ day after the receipt of Messrs. Quirk and Snap's letter had
now elapsed. Mr. Aubrey did not venture to quit the house. All of them
were, as may well be imagined, in a state of pitiable distress, and
agitation, and suspense. Thus also passed the _fifth_ day--still the
blow descended not. Was the arm extended to inflict it, held back,
still, by Mr. Gammon continuing thus the "_incredible efforts_" spoken
of in his note?

The _sixth_ morning dawned on the wretched family. They all rose at a
somewhat earlier hour than usual. They could scarce touch the spare and
simple breakfast spread before them, nor enjoy--nay, they could hardly
bear--the prattle and gambols of the lively little ones, Charles and
Agnes, whom at length they despatched back again to the nursery; for
they were, in the highest possible state of excitement and anxiety,
awaiting the arrival of the postman--this being the first morning on
which they could, in the ordinary course, receive a letter from Lady
Stratton in answer to that of Kate. 'T was now a little past ten. The
breakfast things had been removed; and on hearing the agitating though
long-expected _rat-tat_ of the postman a few doors down the street, Mrs.
Aubrey and Kate started to the window. Their hearts beat violently when
their eye at length caught sight of him, with his arm full of letters,
knocking at the door opposite. Oh, had he a letter for _them_? How long
were their opposite neighbors in answering his summons, and in paying
the postage! Then he stood for nearly a minute laughing with a servant
in the adjoining area--intolerable indeed was all this, to the agitated
beings who were thus panting for his arrival! Presently he glanced at
the packet in his hand, and taking one of the letters from it, crossed
the street, making for their door.

"Heavens! He _has_ a letter!" cried Miss Aubrey, excitedly--"I sha'n't
wait for Fanny!" and, flying to the front door, plucked it open the
instant after the postman had knocked. He touched his hat on seeing,
instead of a servant, the beautiful but agitated lady, who stretched
forth her hand and took the letter, exclaiming, "Fanny will pay
you"--but in an instant her cheek was blanched, and she nearly fell to
the floor, at sight of the black border, the black seal, and the
handwriting, which she did not at the instant recognize. For a moment or
two she seemed to have lost the power of speech or motion; but presently
her trembling limbs bore her into the parlor. "Oh! Charles--Agnes--I
feel as if I were going to _die_--look"--she faltered, sinking into the
nearest chair, while Mr. Aubrey, with much agitation, took the
ominous-looking letter which she extended towards him. 'T was from Mr.
Parkinson; and told the news of Lady Stratton's death, and the
lamentable circumstances attending it; that--as the reader has
heard--she had died intestate--and that Mr. Titmouse had, as next of
kin, become entitled to administration to her effects. All this
disastrous intelligence was conveyed in a very few hurried lines. "Oh,
my God!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, on having glanced over them. His color
fled, and he pressed his hand against his forehead. "She is dead!" said
he, in a low tone, at the same time giving Kate the letter, and
hastening to Mrs. Aubrey, who seemed nearly fainting. Each had uttered a
faint scream on hearing his words. Mrs. Aubrey swooned in his arms
--and Kate sat like a statue, without even glancing at the fatal letter
which she held in her hand, but gazing in a sort of stupor at her
brother. She was unable to rise to Mrs. Aubrey's assistance--of whose
state, indeed, she appeared, from her vacant eye, to be hardly aware. At
length a slight sigh announced the returning consciousness of Mrs.
Aubrey; and at the same time Miss Aubrey, with a manifestly desperate
effort, regained her consciousness, and with a cheek white as the paper
at which she was looking, read it over.

"This is very--very--dreadful--Heaven is forsaking us!" at length she
murmured, gazing wofully at her brother and sister.

"Say not so--but rather God's will be done," faltered Mr. Aubrey, his
voice and his countenance evincing the depth of his affliction. "God
help us!" he added in a tone which at length, thrilling through the
overcharged heart of his sister, caused her to weep bitterly; and if
ever there was a mournful scene, it was that which ensued, ere this
doomed family, slowly recovering from the first stunning effects of the
shock which they had just received, had become aware of the full extent
of their misery. They had ever felt towards Lady Stratton--who, as has
been already said, had been poor Kate's godmother--as towards a parent;
and their affection had been doubled after the death of Mrs. Aubrey. Now
she was _gone_; she who would have stood for a little while at least
between them and ruin, was gone! And by an inscrutable and awful
Providence, that which she had sacredly destined to them, and made great
sacrifices to secure to them--and which would have effectually shielded
them from the cruelty and rapacity of their enemies--had been diverted
from them, into the coffers of the most selfish and worthless of
mankind--who seemed, indeed, as if he had been called into existence
only to effect their ruin; even, as it were, _the messenger of Satan to
buffet them_! At length, however, the first natural transports of their
grief having subsided, their stricken hearts returned to their
allegiance towards Heaven; and Mr. Aubrey, whose constancy at once
strengthened and encouraged his partners in affliction, with many
expressions of sincere and confident piety and resignation reminded them
that they were in the hands of God, who intended all earthly
suffering--however unaccountable--however harsh and apparently
undeserved its infliction--to contribute infallibly to the ultimate
benefit of His children. And he reminded them, on that melancholy
occasion, of the example afforded by one whose griefs had far
transcended theirs--the patriarch Job; on whom were suddenly--and to him
apparently without any reason or motive, except the infliction of
evil--accumulated almost every species of misfortune which could befall
humanity. The sudden and total loss of his substance, and of all his
servants, he appears to have borne with fortitude. At length, however,
was announced to him the loss of all his sons and daughters----

     _"Then Job arose and rent his mantle, and shaved his head,
     and fell down upon the ground and worshipped,

     "And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked
     shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath
     taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord.

     "In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly."_

Out of respect to the memory of their dear, venerable, departed friend,
they drew down all the blinds of their little house, thereby spreading
around them a gloom similar to that within. A sad, a mournful little
group they looked! This last sorrow seemed for a while to divert their
thoughts from the peril which momentarily menaced them. They talked with
frequent emotion, and with many tears, of their late friend--recalling,
fondly, innumerable little traits of her gentle and benignant character.
Towards the close of the day their souls were subdued into resignation
to the will of the all-wise Disposer of events: they had, in some
measure, realized the consolations of an enlightened and scriptural
piety.

They met the next morning, at breakfast, with a melancholy composure.
The blinds being drawn down, prevented the bright sunshine out of doors
from entering into the little room where their frugal breakfast was
spread, and where prevailed a gloom more in unison with their saddened
feelings. To all who sat round the table, except little Charles, the
repast was slight indeed: he had shortly before begun to breakfast
down-stairs, instead of in the nursery; and, merry little thing!--all
unconscious of the destitution to which, in all human probability, he
was destined--and of the misery which oppressed and was crushing his
parents--he was rattling away cheerfully, as if nothing could disturb or
interrupt the light-heartedness of childhood. They all started on
hearing the unexpected knock of the general postman. He had brought them
a letter from Dr. Tatham; who, it seemed, was aware of that which had
been the day before despatched to them by Mr. Parkinson. The little
doctor's letter was exceedingly touching and beautiful; and it was a
good while before they could complete its perusal, owing to the emotion
which it occasioned them. 'T was indeed full of tender sympathy--of
instructive incentives to resignation to the will of God.

"Is not that indeed the language of a devout and venerable minister of
God?" said Mr. Aubrey--"whose figure is daily brightening with the glory
reflected from the heaven which he is so rapidly approaching? In the
order of nature, a few short years must see him, also, removed from
us."

"Then we shall indeed be desolate!" said Miss Aubrey, weeping bitterly.

"Heaven," continued her brother, "is speaking to us through one of its
ministers in this letter! Let us listen in reverent humility!" They
remained silent for some moments, Mr. Aubrey re-perusing the long and
closely written letter of which he had been speaking. Presently he heard
a knock at the street door--an ordinary single knock--such as was by no
means unusual at that period of the morning; yet he scarce knew why--it
disconcerted him. He kept, however, his eye upon the letter, while he
heard Fanny opening the door--then a word or two whispered--after which
the parlor door was hastily opened, and Fanny stood there, pale as
death, and unable, evidently from fright, to speak--a heavy step was
heard in the passage--and then there stood behind the terror-stricken
girl a tall stout man in a drab great-coat, with a slouched hat, and a
thick walking-stick in his hand--looking over her shoulder into the
parlor, whose dismayed occupants soon shared the panic of poor Fanny.

"Beg your pardon, sir," said he, civilly advancing into the room, and
removing his hat--"is your name Charles Aubrey?"

"It is, sir," said Mr. Aubrey, rising from his chair--by which time a
second man was standing at the door.

"You're my prisoner, sir," said the man, stepping close up to the
wretched Aubrey, and touching him on the shoulder, at the same time
holding out a thin slip of paper--the warrant by virtue of which he was
then acting. The moment that he advanced towards Mr. Aubrey, a dreadful
shriek burst from Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, who sprang forward, and threw
their arms wildly round him. He implored them to restrain their
feelings--though evidently greatly agitated himself.

"Will you let me look at your warrant?" said he, mildly, to the man who
had arrested him, and remained standing close beside him. Mr. Aubrey,
glancing over the fatal slip of paper, saw that he was arrested for
fourteen hundred pounds and upwards at the suit of Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap.[6]

"You see, sir, it's only my duty to do this here," said the officer,
respectfully, apparently touched by the agony of the two beautiful women
who still clung wildly round one about to be torn ruthlessly from their
arms;--"don't take on so, ladies--there 's no great harm done yet."

"For mercy's sake, Agnes! Kate! as you love me!--Be calm! You afflict me
beyond measure," said Mr. Aubrey, who, though he had grown very pale,
yet preserved under the circumstances a remarkable degree of
self-possession. 'T was, however, a scene which he had been endeavoring
to realize to himself, and prepare for daily, if not hourly, for the
last week.

"Oh, mercy! mercy!--for God's sake have mercy on him! On us!"--exclaimed
Mrs. Aubrey and Kate.

"Oh, good men! kind men!--have mercy!" cried Kate, desperately--"What
are you going to do with him?"

"No harm, miss, you may depend on 't--only he must go with us, seeing we
're _obligated_ to take him."

"For Heaven's sake, don't--don't, for mercy's sake!"--cried Kate,
turning her agonized face towards the man--her hair partially
dishevelled, and her arms still clasping her brother with frantic
energy. Mrs. Aubrey had swooned, and lay insensible in her husband's
arms, supported by his knee; while Fanny, herself half-distracted, was
striving to restore her by rubbing her cold hands.

"Lord, ladies! don't--don't take on in this here way--you're only
a-hurting of yourselves, and you don't do the gentleman any good, you
know--'cause, in course, he's all the sorrier for going," said the
second man, who had by this time entered the room, and stood looking on
concernedly. But Miss Aubrey repeated her inquiries with wild and
frantic impetuosity, for some time not aware that Mrs. Aubrey lay
insensible beside her.

"Jemmy--run and fetch the lady a sup of water from the kitchen--she's
gone into a dead faint--run, my man!" said the officer to his follower,
who immediately obeyed him, and presently returned with a glass of
water; by which time, both Kate, and her brother, and Fanny, were
endeavoring, with great agitation, to restore Mrs. Aubrey, whose
prolonged swoon greatly alarmed them, and in whose sufferings, the sense
of their own seemed for a while absorbed. The two men stood by, grasping
their huge walking-sticks, and their hats, in silence. At length Mrs.
Aubrey showed symptoms of recovery--uttering a long deep sigh.

"I say--master," at length whispered the follower, "I'll tell you what
it is--this here seems a bad business, don't it?"

"Jemmy, Jemmy!" replied his master, sternly, "You a'n't got half the
pluck of a _bum_!--There's nothing in all this when one's used to it, as
I am."

"P'r'aps the gemman don't rightly owe the money, after all."

"Don't he? And _they've_ sworn he _does_?--Come, come, Jem, no chaffing!
The sooner (I'm thinking) we have him off from all this here blubbering,
the better."

"Bless'd if ever I see'd two such beautiful women afore. I don't half
like it; I wish we'd nabbed him in the street--and" he lowered his
whisper--"if there's _much_ o' this here sort o' work to be done, I've
had enough of being a bum already, an' 'll go back to my business
again, bad as times is!"

"Kind--good men!" said Kate, approaching them, and speaking with forced
calmness--pushing aside her disordered hair from her pale cheeks, "Can't
you leave him here--only a day longer?"

"Can't, miss--it's quite _un_possible; it's not to be done for no money
short of debt and costs," said the officer, respectfully, but rather
doggedly--as if he were getting tired of the scene--"one would think we
were a-going to murder the gemman! Once for all, if so be as he will
only go as a gemman should, to my little place in Chancery-Lane--(my
name's Grab, miss, at your service, and there a'n't a better conducted
lock-up nor mine in London, I assure you, nor where debtors is more
comfortably looked arter)--he's no need to be there above a day or
two--it may be less--and of course his friends will come and bail him
out; so _don't_ be a-going on so when it's no manner o' use!"

"Charles! My love!" murmured Mrs. Aubrey, faintly--"they surely will not
separate us? Oh! let us go together; I don't care where we go to, so
long as I am with you."

"Do not ask it, my darling! my heart's love!" replied Mr. Aubrey,
tenderly, as he supported her in his arms, and against his knee--and a
tear fell from his eye upon her cheek--"I shall be exposed to but little
inconvenience, I am certain; there can be no violence or insult offered
me so long as I submit myself peaceably to the laws! And I shall soon,
please God, be back!"

"Oh, Charles! I shall die--I shall never survive seeing you carried
away!" she replied--and her manner was becoming increasingly vehement.

"Agnes, Agnes!" said her husband, reprovingly, "the mother must not
desert her children; my heart will ache every moment that I am absent,
if I think that my dear little ones have not a mother's protection."

"Kate will take care of them, love!" said Mrs. Aubrey, faintly; and her
husband tenderly kissed her forehead. While this hurried colloquy
between the wretched couple was proceeding, Kate was talking in low but
impassioned tones to the two officers, who listened to her respectfully,
but shook their heads.

"No, miss--it _can't_ be; it can't indeed."

"But you shall have _everything_ in the house for your security--I have
still a good many handsome dresses; jewels, all--all; surely they will
produce _something_; and then there's plate, and books, and
furniture--you can't think Mr. Aubrey's going basely to run away!"----

"If, as how, miss, (you see,) it was only ourselves that you had to do
with--(but, Lord love you, miss! we 're only officers, and has our duty
to do, and _must_ do it!)--why, we'd go a little out of our way for to
oblige a lady; but the people you must go to is the gemmen whose names
is here," pointing to the warrant; "they're the people as the money's
owing to--Quirk, Gamm"----

"Don't name them! They are fiends! They are villains! They are robbing,
and then ruining, my wretched brother!" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, with
dreadful vehemence.

"Kate, Kate!" cried Mr. Aubrey, kindly but peremptorily--"in mercy to
me, be silent! Restrain your feelings, or really I must hasten my
departure."

"Oh, Charles!" faltered Miss Aubrey, sinking down on a chair exhausted,
and burying her face in her handkerchief.

"Now, sir--if _you_ please," commenced Grab, turning to Mr. Aubrey, "we
must be thinking of going, seeing, I expect, I've another job on hand
to-day; would you prefer coaching, or walking it? Excuse me, sir--I've
seen many such things as this; and I know it's only a haggrawating of
your feelings to be stopping here--the longer the worse! What must be,
had better be done at once, and got over with. I've been a-telling this
here young lady a many times, that it's no use fretting--and that in
course you'll be soon back again, when you've done what's needful; so
hadn't my man here better go and get a coach?"

"It is so, indeed!" exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, with a profound sigh--and
endeavored for some time by all the means in his power to soothe and
pacify his wretched companions.

"Can I speak a word with you alone, before I go?" he presently inquired
of the officer.

"In course, sir," replied Grab; and promising to return within a minute
or two's time, Mr. Aubrey quitted the room with Grab close at his heels;
and presently they were both standing in his little study.

"Betwixt ourselves, sir," quoth Grab, in a confidential tone, "you've
_rather_ keen hands to deal with;" here he laid his finger along his
nose, and winked his eye--"and you'll lose no time in turning yourself
about. You understand, sir?"

"Perfectly," replied Mr. Aubrey, with a sigh. "Who gave you your
instructions in this matter?"

"Mr. Snap--the junior partner--it was him that brought this here warrant
to me"----

"Are you sure? Was it not Mr. Gammon?"

"No, sir--Snap--Snap; that little cockatoo of a chap. Mr. Gammon called
at my office half an hour afterwards, to be sure"----

"I thought so," interrupted Mr. Aubrey, quickly, his face flushing, and
feeling relieved from a vast pressure.

"Ay," continued Grab, phlegmatically, "_he'll_ see you don't come to
much harm in this matter"----

"What do you mean?" inquired Mr. Aubrey, with surprise.

"Lord! I could tell by his way. He called to say that, since they had
resolved to go agin you, he hoped, we 'd show you every attention, and
deal easy by you"----

"Indeed!"

"Ay--indeed! And I think he said it was a cruel business--nay, I'm
_sure_ he did; and that, as for him, he washed his hands on 't!" Mr.
Aubrey seemed confounded.

"I don't somehow think him and his partners are on the best of terms
together--but that's no business o' mine, you know, sir! And now, sir,
excuse me, but we must be jogging."

"But, my friend, is there really no way," inquired Mr. Aubrey, with
manifest perturbation, "by which I can delay accompanying you for a few
hours"----

"Oh can't, sir--_un_possible!"

"You can remain in possession here--I will be in your custody--I have a
little plate, books, and furniture, which would surely stand sufficient
security"----

"It 's no use, sir; go you must--and that without much longer
shilly-shallying. It's no use!"

Aubrey seemed for a moment overpowered by his emotions.

"I fear, myself, that there is no alternative," said he; "but it will
almost break the hearts of those ladies--one of whom is my wife"----His
voice faltered.

"You take my advice, sir! Let my man start off for a coach--you have a
shirt or two put up, and an amusing book--or a bit of a cribbage-board,
or a pack of cards, if they're at hand--and give 'em the slip; if you'll
believe me, sir, it 's much the best way; and when you're once out o'
the house, they'll come to, and make up their minds to it--never fear
'em."

"Send, then, for a coach--delay, I see, is worse than useless," said he,
hastily, hearing steps approaching the study door, which was thrust
open, and Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey entered, unable any longer to
endure his absence--and as if fearful lest, in mercy to them, he should
be contriving to leave them secretly. Grab, having despatched his
follower for a coach, at Mr. Aubrey's earnest request to be left alone
for a few minutes, withdrew--but first cast a keen scrutinizing eye at
the window--and then the chimney--and then, having closed the door,
stood outside, in a position which commanded both door and window.

"Now, my own Agnes! my sweet Kate!" commenced Aubrey, in a low, earnest
tone, having bolted the door to secure themselves from interruption
during the few precious moments which remained to them before the
arrival of the coach--"I must, within a very few minutes, leave you!
Remember--remember, loves!--I am unfortunate, but, I am not
disgraced!--I look on this as a dispensation of Providence--an
infinitely wise, and good Providence; let us all learn submission, and
resignation! Whether or not we are really the victims of treachery and
hypocrisy, I am unable at present to tell; but let us learn to bear this
last crowning indignity with the fortitude of Christians!--relying on
it, that God will overrule the most trying and disastrous events for our
eventual good! Kneel down! Let us bow before the throne of Heaven, and
supplicate its blessing and support, in this our greatest extremity!" He
said this calmly; but his face was deadly pale, and his voice
faltered--while they clung round him and heaved convulsive sobs, as,
half unconsciously, they sank on their knees with him. Then they
rose--and certainly a gracious Providence had not listened in vain to
the earnest, heartfelt cries uttered by those persecuted and
heart-broken beings; for they felt a sense of composure stealing over
their troubled bosoms--as if they had seen for a moment a bright light
glancing through the gloom of their sorrows. Yet poor nature was
wrung--wrung indeed! Mr. Aubrey proceeded to make some little
preparations for his departure--putting a five-pound note into his
pocket--and leaving but little more behind him; and the servant being
summoned into the room, was despatched to put up a change of linen
for him. He then implored and conjured them, as they loved him, to
struggle against their feelings;--and to rely upon his pledge to
send them, within two hours at the furthest, intelligence of his
movements--assuring them of his confident belief, that in less than
twenty-four hours he should have returned to them. While he was speaking
in this strain, Mrs. Aubrey suddenly quitted the room, and after a
moment's absence returned, her pallid, agitated countenance overspread
with a wild smile of delight, as she exclaimed breathlessly--"There,
love! Dearest Charles! He says there is no harm in the world in my going
with you in the coach--and, indeed, we may have rooms to ourselves!"

"My sweet Agnes"----

"I will--I _will_ go with you, Charles! Nothing shall prevent me--even
if I leave you at the door of the place you are going to!" It was in
vain for Mr. Aubrey to protest--as he did, both earnestly and
vehemently;--her impassioned importunities were irresistible, and she
rushed breathlessly up-stairs to prepare her dress to accompany him on
his brief but melancholy journey. Within a very few minutes she had
returned, just as the sound of the coach-wheels approaching the door was
heard. Mr. Aubrey and Kate perceived the dangerous excitement under
which she was laboring, and dreaded its effects: yet what could be done?
He could not prolong his stay--and it would be infinitely more dangerous
to leave her behind, now that she had set her heart upon accompanying
him, than to permit her to do so. She carried down little Agnes in her
arms--and had been almost suffocating her and Charles, who walked after
her, with kisses and convulsive embraces. Both the children were crying
bitterly; and as soon as Mrs. Aubrey had reached the parlor door, and
heard the coach-steps letting down, she fell into violent hysterics.

"I'll tell you what, sir," whispered Grab, as he stood close beside Mr.
Aubrey, who was supporting Mrs. Aubrey--"it wouldn't be amiss if I was
to say you should come along with me at once, while this poor lady's
insensible--and then when she 'd have come to herself, and know'd you
was _gone_, and no mistake--why--she'd in course think no more of it
"----

"Oh! for God's sake--for God's sake! Remember your promise!" cried
Aubrey, and in a voice which nearly reached the officer's heart: as it
was, he simply shrugged his shoulders, and awaited the issue with no
little impatience, but in silence. 'T was in the midst of this
heart-rending scene, which ensued during the next half-hour, that Kate
displayed the strength of character which so remarkably distinguished
her; and, completely mastering her own agitated feelings, she
essentially contributed towards Mrs. Aubrey's restoration to a state
which would admit of her at length setting off. The children had been
removed--Mr. Aubrey having bid them an agonizing adieu; for he knew not
what accident or contrivance might occur to prevent his return to
them--and after embracing his weeping sister, he supported Mrs. Aubrey,
Grab closely following them, into the coach. All three having got in,
"Jem," as he was called, shut up the door, jumped up on to the
coach-box, and then they drove away. Poor Mrs. Aubrey, on taking her
seat, drew from before her agitated yet beautiful countenance the long
dark veil which she had drawn down while passing from the house into the
coach, and gazed at Mr. Aubrey with such an expression of mingled
tenderness and agony, as was almost sufficient to have broken even the
stony heart of Grab. She also held her husband's hand convulsively
grasped within her own--as though fearful of their being even yet
violently separated from each other. As they went along, in answer to
Aubrey's anxious inquiries concerning the nature of the scenes which
awaited him, Mr. Grab told him that his--Grab's--lock-up was in
Chancery-Lane, and would be found as comfortable a place as need be. He
informed his prisoner, further, that he might have his choice,--whether
to occupy a private room, with a bedroom opening into it--or go into the
public room, where would be also some dozen other debtors,--and in which
case, of course, Mrs. Aubrey must return home alone. Mr. Aubrey inquired
what would be the expense of the private room, and was horrified on
hearing--two guineas and a half a-day, paid in advance!--exclusive of
board and attendance, which doubtless would be charged for on a
commensurate scale. The prisoner and his wife gazed at each other in
silence, and felt sick at heart.

"The smallest room--at the very top of the house--would suffice for both
a sitting-room and bedroom," said Aubrey--"and we do not care a straw
for furniture"----

"The room I told you of, or the public room, is all I've to offer you,"
replied Grab, somewhat doggedly--"and you needn't cry out before you're
hurt; for it may be your friends will bail you out before the
night--before much harm's done!" His wretched companions continued
silent for the remainder of the journey, till the coach drew up
opposite the door of the house of which they had been speaking. It was
about half-way up Chancery-Lane, on the right-hand side as you entered
from the Strand. 'T was a small, narrow, dingy-looking house, at the
corner of a miserable court. The solitary window, level with the door,
was strongly secured within by thick perpendicular iron bars. The outer
door, at the top of a flight of about a dozen well-worn steps, stood
open, leaving exposed to view an inner door, at about a couple of yards'
distance from the outer one; and on this inner door was a brass plate
bearing the terrifying name--

                             "G R A B."

The upper part of the door was of glass, and secured on the inside, like
the window, by strong iron bars. Aubrey's soul sank within him as his
eye took in these various points of the dismal building--the very first
which he had ever been _compelled to enter_. The follower, immediately
on the coach drawing up, jumped down, and running up the steps of the
house, knocked at the inner door, and hurrying back, opened the
coach-door, and let down the steps.

"Now, Jarvey--what's the damage?" inquired Grab, before any of them got
out.

"Six shillings, your honor."

"You must tip, sir," quoth Grab to Mr. Aubrey--who thereupon counted out
all the silver he had except one solitary sixpence, and they descended,
followed up the steps of the house closely by Grab. Their hearts failed
them, as they heard the sound of heavy jingling keys from within opening
the door; and the next moment they stood within a short, narrow, and
dark passage--the sallow ill-looking man who had opened the door
instantly closing, barring, and locking it upon them.

"This here's the public room," quoth Grab, with the confident air of a
man who feels in his own house; and, half opening a door on his
left--they caught a glimpse of a number of men--some smoking; others
sitting with their feet on the table, reading the newspapers; others
playing at cards; and almost all of them drinking, and either laughing,
talking, or singing.

"Now, sir--does this _here_ suit your fancy?" inquired Grab, rather
sharply. Mr. Aubrey felt his wife leaning heavily on his arm. "Mercy! I
shall faint! I feel choked!"--she whispered.

"Show us instantly upstairs, to your private room--cost what it may,"
said Mr. Aubrey, hastily.

"It's only fair to tell you, sir, you pay in advance--and for the whole
day, though you should be out again in a quarter of an hour's time--it's
the rule of the house."

"Show us upstairs, sir, without delay," said Mr. Aubrey, peremptorily.

"Jemmy--show 'em up!" exclaimed Grab, briskly--on which Jem went
forward, followed by Mr. Aubrey, almost entirely supporting Mrs.
Aubrey--who appeared very faint--Grab bringing up the rear--up the
narrow and angular staircase. This led them into a tolerably
well-furnished room; and Mrs. Aubrey, on entering it, sank exhausted on
the sofa. Here, again, the two windows were strongly secured with iron
bars, which gave a peculiarly miserable appearance to the room. The
unhappy couple gazed around them for a moment, in silence.

"Beg your pardon, sir," said Grab, entering the room, "but must trouble
you for _two, twelve, six_; always pay in advance, as I told you
a-coming."

Aubrey involuntarily shuddering, took out his pocket-book--Mrs. Aubrey
bursting into tears--and handed to Grab the only money he had--his
five-pound note, requesting change.

"The lady would, perhaps, like a glass of negus?" inquired Grab.

"Certainly--bring up immediately a glass of cold sherry and water,"
replied Aubrey.

"That will be just _two, five, six_ to bring back--shall have it
directly, sir--change and all. Here's your bedroom, sir," he
added--opening a small door opposite the window--and then withdrew by
that through which they had entered. The moment that they were left
alone, Aubrey folded his arms tenderly around his wife, and kissed her
cold pale cheek; and then helped her to remove her bonnet, which, with
its heavy black veil, evidently oppressed her. Her rich dark hair fell
disordered over her tippet; and with her flushed cheek and restless eye,
would have given the beholder a vivid picture of beauty and virtue in
distress.

"Do promise me, Charles!" said she, looking fondly at him, "that I may
go with you wherever they will allow you to take me!"

"I trust, Agnes, that I shall be released before long. This is really a
comfortable room, considering!" he added, evading her question.

"If only Kate and the children were here," she replied tremulously.
"Poor things! I wonder what they are doing just now--Kate will break her
heart, poor girl, if we don't return soon!"

"Never fear, Agnes. But let us look what kind of a bedroom they have
given us. I hope we shall have no occasion, however, to occupy it. Come,
let us see!"

'T was very small and close, to be sure, and had but one narrow window,
secured, like all the others, by strong iron bars. It overlooked a
little flagged yard, about fourteen feet square, surrounded on all sides
by high walls, portions of adjoining houses. It was here that the
prisoners "_took the air_," and their escape was effectually prevented
by close and strong bars of iron passing from side to side, at about ten
feet distance from the ground. They looked down, and beheld two or three
men sitting and standing beneath, who looked more like animals caged in
a menagerie, than human beings. 'T was to Aubrey a sickening sight; and
turning from the window, they both re-entered the front room, as Grab
returned with the sherry and water, and the change, which he told down
on the table. He then asked what they would like to have for
dinner--cutlets, steaks, or chops--as he wished to know before Mrs. Grab
went out "to order the house dinner." They seemed, however, to loathe
the idea of eating, not a little to the annoyance of their truly
hospitable host; Aubrey earnestly begging him to send off a message
instantly, with his card, to Mr. Runnington.

"A couple of shillings for the man, sir," said Grab; and, having
received it, withdrew, leaving Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey to themselves for
nearly an hour and a half; at the end of which period, their hearts
leaped for joy to see Mr. Runnington enter the room, with a countenance
full of concern and sympathy.

"Well, but you shall not be much longer in this hateful hole, at any
rate," said he, after some half-hour's anxious conversation with them;
and ringing the bell, directed the man to send Grab up-stairs, and to
fetch pen, ink, and paper. In a few minutes Grab appeared. "You've no
objection, I suppose, Grab, to discharge Mr. Aubrey on my undertaking?"

"In course not, sir," replied Grab, readily; but he was not a little
disappointed at so abrupt a close to his exactions. Mr. Runnington sat
down and began to write. "You had better send off to the office, and see
if there's anything else there," he added, (meaning that Grab should
search, as he was bound to do, for any other writs against Mr. Aubrey
which might be lodged with the sheriff, before discharging his prisoner
out of custody.)

"You don't apprehend anything _there_, do you?" inquired Mr. Runnington,
rather seriously, without taking his eye from the paper on which he was
writing.

"Heaven only knows! But I _think_ not," replied Aubrey.

The following was the undertaking given by Mr. Runnington, and which
operated as an instant release of his oppressed and truly persecuted
client:--

     "Aubrey _ats_. Quirk and others.

     "We hereby undertake to procure the execution of a good
     and sufficient bail-bond herein, for the above-named defendant,
     in due time.

                                              "RUNNINGTON & CO.,
                                              Defendant's Attorneys.

                 "To MR. GRAB,
     Officer of the Sheriff of Middlesex."

With this document lying before them, and awaiting the messenger's
return from the sheriff's office, Mr. Runnington and Mr. Aubrey
conversed together anxiously on the subject of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap's bill. Mr. Aubrey was sufficiently acquainted with the general
course of practice to be aware, that beyond requiring him to put in bail
to the action, (special bail, as it was called,) no effectual step could
be taken against him for several months to come; _i.e._ till Michaelmas
term in the ensuing _November_,[7] however eager and active the
plaintiffs might be: so that he had an interval of at least four months,
in which, as the phrase is, "to turn himself about," and endeavor to
discover some mode of extricating himself from his present serious
dilemma. After reminding Mr. Aubrey that neither a peer of the realm,
nor a member of Parliament, nor an attorney,[8] could become bail for
him, Mr. Runnington requested the names of two or three confidential
friends to whom he might apply to become security for Mr. Aubrey; and as
he should be at any time able to exonerate them from liability, by
surrendering his person to his creditors, he felt no hesitation in
applying to them to perform for him this act of kindness. "By the way,"
said Mr. Runnington, in the course of their conversation, and with
apparent carelessness, "could I say a word or two to you on a little
matter of business? And will Mrs. Aubrey excuse us for a moment?"
turning towards her. She bowed, and they withdrew for a moment into the
adjoining bedroom.

"Put this into your pocket," said Mr. Runnington, taking out the day's
newspaper; "and when you have an opportunity, read the account of what
took place yesterday in the Court of King's Bench. It startled _me_ not
a little, I can tell you; and the reason of my not having been at the
office when your messenger arrived was, that I had not returned from
Vivian Street, whither, and to the Temple, I had gone in search of you.
For Heaven's sake, don't alarm Mrs. Aubrey, or Miss Aubrey; but, if
anything occurs to you, do not lose one moment in putting yourself into
communication with us. If possible, I will call at Vivian Street this
evening." With this they returned to the sitting-room, nothing in their
appearance calculated to alarm Mrs. Aubrey, or even attract her
attention.

Shortly afterwards Grab entered the room.

"All right, sir!" said he to Mr. Runnington; and added, turning to Mr.
Aubrey, "you're no longer in my custody, sir!"

"Oh, Charles! thank God!--Let us not stay another moment!" exclaimed
Mrs. Aubrey, joyously starting up, and putting on her bonnet. "Oh, let
us get once more into the open street!--the sweet fresh air!--Kate will
go wild with joy to see us again--Oh, dear Mr. Runnington! how can we
sufficiently thank you?" she added, turning towards him
enthusiastically. Within a few minutes' time they had quitted that
dismal scene; and were again apparently free. On first stepping into the
bright cheering sunlight, and bustling noisy street, it had a wondrous
sort of freshness and novelty--to them. _Now_ they were free to go
whithersoever they chose!--Oh, blessed LIBERTY!--let an Englishman lose
thee for but an hour, to become aware of thy value!--It seemed to Mr.
and Mrs. Aubrey, as if ten times the real interval had elapsed between
their entering and quitting the scene of his incarceration. With what
exhilarated spirits they hastened homeward! as if a millstone were no
longer suspended from their necks. But Mr. Aubrey suddenly bethought
himself of the newspaper given him by Mr. Runnington; and it cost him,
indeed, a great effort to assume a cheerfulness so foreign to his
feelings.

While, however, they are thus walking homeward, intending, in the event
of Mrs. Aubrey becoming fatigued, to take a coach, let me, in order to
enable the reader to appreciate the paragraph to which Mr. Runnington
had called Aubrey's attention, turn for a while from this virtuous and
afflicted couple, to trace the leading movements of that master-spirit
of evil, Mr. Gammon; for which purpose, it will be necessary to take up
our history from the evening of the day in which Mr. Aubrey had called
at Mr. Gammon's chambers, to forbid him visiting any longer at Vivian
Street. By that time, Mr. Gammon had thoroughly thought _out_ his plan
of operations. What had passed between him and Miss Aubrey and her
brother, had satisfied him that the time for calling into action all his
forces had arrived; and the exact end he proposed to himself was, to
plunge Mr. Aubrey at once into apparently inextricable and hopeless
difficulty--into total ruin--so as to render them all more accessible to
Mr. Gammon's advances, and force Miss Aubrey into entertaining his
addresses, as the sole means of effecting her brother's liberation. For
this purpose, it would be necessary to make him debtor to so large an
amount as would preclude the interference of even the most liberally
disposed of his friends. Those might very probably go as far as fifteen
hundred pounds on his behalf, who could not be brought to think of
twelve thousand pounds--it being borne in mind, that one alone of Mr.
Aubrey's friends, Lord De la Zouch, was already liable, on his behalf,
to some eleven thousand pounds, which would become payable on the
ensuing 24th of January. But the mask was not yet to be thrown off;
Gammon resolved to appear the firm friend of Mr. Aubrey to the last;
deprecating vehemently, and striving to avert from him, the very
proceedings which he was all the while, with secret skill and vigor,
urging on against him. He determined, therefore, to recall Titmouse's
attention to the two promissory notes for £5,000 each; to pretend
reluctance to allow them to be put in suit, and yet give him clearly to
understand that _he_ might do so, without fear of giving mortal offence
to Mr. Gammon.

At the moment of the reader's being reintroduced to Mr. Gammon, that
gentleman was sitting, about nine o'clock in the evening, at his
chambers, beside a table, on which were placed a lamp, a number of
papers, and coffee. In one hand he held the rough draft of his
rent-charge, which had that day been sent to him by Mr. Frankpledge, and
he was occasionally making pencil memoranda on the margin as he went
along. He would sometimes pause in his task, as if his thoughts wandered
to other subjects; his countenance looked harassed, his ample brow
seemed laden with anxiety. Certainly, great as was his energy, clear as
was his head, and accustomed as he was to the despatch of business of
even the most difficult and varied description, all his powers were at
that moment taxed to their very uttermost stretch, as a hasty glance
round the room would have satisfied the reader. On the sofa lay several
piles of loose papers. First, there were the draft briefs--and
voluminous they were--which he was now preparing, or rather settling, in
the following actions for bribery penalties, coming on for trial at the
ensuing Yorkshire assizes:--

        "WIGLEY V. GAMMON, (_S. J._)"[9]
        "_Same_   v. MUDFLINT, (_S. J._)"
        "_Same_   v. BLOODSUCK, (_S. J._)"
        "_Same_   v. WOODLOUSE, (_S. J._)"

All these serious actions were being pushed forward with great vigor, at
the instance of Lord De la Zouch, who had, moreover, directed them all
to be made special jury causes.

Secondly, a monstrous mass of papers, also lying on the sofa, contained
the heterogeneous elements, out of which it required a head as clear as
Gammon's to draw up a brief for the defence in a very complicated case
of _conspiracy_--"The KING V. MIDDLETON SNAKE, and OTHERS,"--and which
was coming on for trial at the ensuing King's Bench sittings for London;
it having been removed, on account of its great difficulty and
importance, by _certiorari_[10] from the Old Bailey. It ought to have
been by this time prepared; yet Mr. Gammon had scarcely even looked at
the papers, though the credit of their office was at stake, as the case
had attracted a large share of public attention.

Thirdly, there were scattered about threatening masses of documents
connected with the various joint-stock companies in which Mr. Gammon was
concerned, either openly or secretly--either professionally or as a
shareholder; the management of many of them requiring infinite
vigilance and tact. These matters, however, and many others which had
accumulated, till the bare thoughts of them oppressed and distracted
him, he had altogether neglected, absorbed as he was by the pursuit of
Miss Aubrey, and the consummation of his schemes and purposes respecting
Titmouse and the Yatton property. As if all this had not been sufficient
occupation for him, there was yet another of a totally different
description. He was writing a series of very popular and powerful
attacks in the _Sunday Flash_, upon a certain Tory ex-Minister--in fact,
endeavors to write him down--and this with the privity, and even
occasional assistance, of one whom Gammon intended, in due time, to make
great use of, as soon as his Lordship should have sufficiently committed
himself thus, and otherwise; viz. my Lord Blossom and Box. Now, Gammon
had for three weeks running disappointed the numerous readers of the
_Sunday Flash_, during which period, also, he had been almost baited to
death upon the subject by old Quirk, the chief proprietor of the paper;
and that very evening, the odious VIPER, its editor, had been there, as
it were, writhing and hissing about him till he had given a positive
pledge to prepare an article against the ensuing Saturday. All these
things put together, were enough for one strong-headed man to bear up
against, and Gammon felt very nearly overwhelmed; and the reader will
think it very excusable in Mr. Gammon, that he felt such difficulty in
commanding his thoughts even to the interesting task of settling the
draft of his own rent-charge on the Yatton property. He was not quite
satisfied with the way in which Frankpledge had tinkered up the
"_consideration_" shadowed forth in Gammon's instructions, and was just
sketching off one compounded of a "certain sum of five thousand pounds
of good and lawful money of Great Britain, by the aforesaid Oily
Gammon, at or before the execution of these presents, paid to the said
Tittlebat Titmouse, and the receipt whereof the said Titmouse thereby
acknowledged, and from the same and every part thereof, released and
discharged the said Oily Gammon, his heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns" (!!!) and also "of the great skill, and exertion, and
sacrifices of the said Oily Gammon, for and on behalf of the said
Tittlebat Titmouse, in and in respect of the recovery of the Yatton
property," &c. &c.

I say he had just finished off this little matter, and was varying one
or two of the expressions, when a sharp knock at his door announced the
arrival of the intelligent grantor of the aforesaid annuity, Mr.
Titmouse himself, whose stylish cab was at that moment standing opposite
to the entrance to Thavies' Inn, in Holborn, having brought him direct
from the House of Commons, whither, however, he was to return by eleven
o'clock, till which time he had paired off, in order to enable him to
come and consult Mr. Gammon on one or two important matters. Poor
Titmouse had conceived, since his memorable interview with Gammon,
formerly related, a violent hatred of Mr. Gammon; but which was almost
absorbed in his dread of that gentleman, who had such unlimited power
over him. The sudden and serious diminution of his income by Gammon's
rent-charge, almost turned his head upside-down, and occasioned a pother
in his little bosom, which was all the greater for his being unable to
admit any sympathizing friend into his confidence. He had become fidgety
and irritable to a degree; his countenance and demeanor troubled and
depressed; from all which, the more intimate among his brother senators
naturally inferred that he had lost large sums at play, or was harassed
by his election expenses; or had quarrelled with his mistress, or been
found out by his wife; or been kicked, and dared not call out the
aggressor; or that some other such accident as frequently happens to
young gentlemen of fashion, had befallen him. Now, to be candid with the
reader, Titmouse certainly _was_ getting into rather deep water.
Formidable creditors were beginning to look somewhat sternly after him
from various quarters; his upholsterer was becoming troublesome; his
wine-merchant insisted on at least four hundred pounds on account;
Messrs. Jimcrack and Nicknack were surprised at having received no
payment for sundry expensive articles of jewelry and _vertu_. His
coach-maker, his tailor, a host of household creditors, were getting
very restless; he had a running account of some £600 or £800 at the
_Gliddington_, in respect of his Parliamentary and other dinners at that
fashionable establishment; his yacht was a dreadful drain upon him; he
had been unfortunate in his sporting speculations; in short, if Gammon
had his anxieties, so had Titmouse his. He felt himself getting terribly
out at elbows--so much so, that he could no longer give that calm and
undivided attention to his Parliamentary duties, which his enlightened
constituents had a right to expect at his hands: and in short, the sole
occasion of his calling on Gammon, was to see if that gentleman could
devise some mode of once more replenishing his empty coffers--a further
mortgage on the Yatton property being the exact mode of doing so, which
he was about to propose to Gammon. It required some tact, however, as he
felt, to broach that subject in the present position of affairs; so he
avowed that he had called to see if _Mr. Gammon's deeds were ready for
signing_--as he, Titmouse, was anxious to get it off his mind. Time was
very precious with Mr. Gammon; he therefore lost not a moment in
plucking aside the thin disguise of Titmouse, and discovering the real
object of his visit. Mr. Gammon looked very serious indeed, on hearing
the account of Titmouse's prodigal expenditure, and remonstrated with
him earnestly, and even authoritatively; but it instantly occurred to
him--could there possibly be a better opportunity for broaching the
subject of the two promissory notes?

"My dear Titmouse," said he, with great kindness of manner,
"notwithstanding all I have felt it my duty to say, I do sincerely wish
it were in my power to serve you in this emergency. But we really must
spare old Yatton for a little--you've sadly burdened her already;--we
shall be killing the goose to get at the golden egg, if we don't mind
what we're about!"

"----! But what the devil's to be _done_, Mr. Gammon? For, 'pon my soul,
I'm most _particular_ hard up, and _something_ must be done."

"We must bethink ourselves of our other resources, my dear
Titmouse!--let us see"--he paused, with his hand resting on his forehead
for a few moments--"Oh! by the way--certainly," he added suddenly--"but
no! it's a thousand pities; but my word is pledged."

"Eh? what? does anything strike you, Gammon?--'Pon my life, what is it?"
inquired Titmouse, pricking up his ears.

"Why, yes, certainly," replied Gammon, musingly--adding, as if he did
not intend Titmouse to hear him, "to be sure, it would put ten
thousand--nay, with the interest, nearly eleven"----

"The devil it would! _What_ would? My stars, Mr. Gammon!" exclaimed
Titmouse, eagerly--"Do let us know what it is!"

"Why, I was certainly thinking, at the moment," replied Gammon, with a
sigh, "of that poor devil Aubrey's two notes for £5,000 a-piece and
interest."

Titmouse's face suddenly fell. "Oh Lord! Is that all? Hang the
fellow--he's a beggar--squeezed dry--nothing more to be got out of him!"
he exclaimed with mingled chagrin and contempt. "A'n't worth powder and
shot! Blood from a stone!--won't have anything worth taking this ten
years to come!"

"Poor fellow!" quoth Gammon.

"'Pon my soul, Gammon, it's _me_ you may say that of, I rather think!"

"Why," said Gammon, glancing rather keenly at Titmouse, "my first and
greatest duty on earth, my dear Titmouse, is to _you_--to look after, to
secure your interests; and candor compels me to say, that, whatever may
be my feelings towards that unfortunate person, still, I think, you've
only to squeeze _him_ pretty hard, and blood would come from _other_
people. Eh! you understand?"

"By Jove!--Indeed!--No! But would it really? How?--Squeeze away, then,
and be----! Please bring an action against the fellow, the first thing
in the morning! Put him in jail, and he'll get the money, I'll warrant
him! Dem the fellow! why don't he pay his debts? It's devilish hard on
_me_, a'n't it? Didn't I forgive him forty thousand pounds? By the way,
I'd forgot there's the other ten thousand that Lord De la Zouch is
surety for--when do we touch that?"

"Oh! we've taken a bond for _that_, which will not fall due before--let
me see--the 24th of next January."

"'Pon my soul, what a cursed bore! But can't one do anything with it
before then?"

"What! Sue on it before it's due?"

"No--egad! I mean, raise the wind on it. Surely Lord De la Zouch's name
is"----

"Whew!" thought Gammon, "that stroke certainly had never occurred to
me!--Ay, he's right, the little fool! Old Fang will advance £8,000 or
£9,000, or more even--I'll see to it, by Jove!" Then he said aloud--"It
may be possible, certainly, my dear Titmouse; but I see very great
obstacles in the way."

"Some cussed law point--eh?"

"Yes--but I assure you I will turn my best attention to it," he added;
and proceeded to bring back Titmouse to the point at which he had
started off. "And speaking of poor Aubrey--it's certainly true that you
have been, I may say, extravagantly liberal to him--forbearing beyond
example; and I can't think that any one can be expected, when he knows a
wave of his hand will put some eleven thousand pounds into his pocket,
to stand by idle forever! It is not in human nature"----

"No; 'pon my life it isn't," quoth Titmouse, with a puzzled air, quite
unable to make out whether Gammon intended to favor or discourage the
notion of immediately proceeding against Aubrey; which Gammon observing,
he continued--"At all events I should say, that if you consider that
your own necessities"--

"Demme! I should think so!" interposed Titmouse.

"Required it--and, as you very properly observed, _you_ are the best
judge; certainly"----he paused; surely--thought he--Titmouse _now_ saw
his drift!

"Yes--'pon my soul!" exclaimed Titmouse.

"Why, in that case, it is only due to myself to say _I_ can be no party
to it: I have had to bear enough already that was due to others; and
since I have solemnly pledged my word of honor to Mr."----

"What the devil _do_ you mean, Gammon? Cuss me, if I can make you out a
bit!" interrupted Titmouse, snappishly.

"You misunderstand me, my dear Titmouse! Once for all, I say, if you
want the money, you must immediately sue on these notes; and my opinion
is, you'll succeed--only, I _must not appear in it_, you know! But if
you do choose to employ some other solicitor--there's that Mr. Spitfire,
for instance--to _compel_ me to give up the notes."

"Oh Lord! Honor! No, no!--So bless me Heaven! I didn't mean anything of
the kind," cried Titmouse, alarmedly, fearful of offending Gammon, who
could scarcely conceal his impatience and disgust at the stupidity of
Titmouse.

"I cannot make you understand me, Titmouse! What I mean is, it
is my duty not to let my feelings interfere with your interests.
I now, therefore, recommend you--since you have suggested the
thing--immediately to put yourself into the hands--as far as this little
business is concerned--of some other solicitor, say Mr. Spitfire, in
Scorpion Court; and whatever he advises you to do--_do_ without
hesitation. You will probably tell him that, if he demands the two notes
on your behalf, I may, for form's sake, resist: but I know I shall be
ordered to give them up! Well--I can't help it!"

"Honor now, Gammon! May I do as I like?" inquired Titmouse, stupidly.

"Honor!"

"And you won't be angry? Not a bit! eh?"

"On my sacred word of honor!" replied Gammon, solemnly, placing his hand
on his breast.

"Then fire away, Flannagan!" cried Titmouse, joyfully snapping his
fingers. "By Jove, here goes! Here's for a jolly squeeze! Aha! Ten
thousand drops of blood!--by Jove, he'll bleed to death! But, by the
way, what will Mr. Quirk say?"

"Curse Mr. Quirk!" cried Gammon, impatiently; "you know the course you
are to pursue--you are your own master, surely? What has Mr. Quirk to do
with you, when I allow you to act in this way?"

"To be sure! Well! here's a go! Wasn't it a lucky thought of mine to
come here to-night? But don't you forget the other ten thousand--the two
make twenty thousand, by Jove! I'm set up again--aha! And as soon as
ever the House is up, if I don't cut away in my span-new yacht, with a
lot of jolly chaps, to the East Indies, or some _other_ place that'll
take us a good six weeks, or so, to go and come back in. Hollo! Is that
eleven o'clock striking?" he inquired with a start, taking out his
watch; "It is, by Jove! and my pair's up; they'll be dividing--I'm off!
Good-night."

"You remember where Mr. Spitfire lives'!" said Gammon, anxiously. "In
Scorpion Court, Strand. I must say he's one of the most respectable men
in the profession; and _so_ quick!"

"Ah--I remember! I'll be with him the moment after breakfast!" replied
Titmouse: Gammon shook him by the hand--feeling, when he had shut both
his doors, as if he had been playing with an ape. "Oh, thou indefinable
and undiscoverable principle regulating human affairs!" thought he,
falling into a revery, a bitter scowl settling on his strongly-marked
features; "of what nature soever thou art, and if any such there really
be, what conceivable purpose canst thou have had in view in placing this
execrable idiot and ME, in our relative positions?" He pursued this line
of reflection for some time, till he had got into a far more melancholy
and misanthropical humor than he had ever before fallen into--till,
recollecting himself, and with a deep sigh, he rang for a fresh supply
of coffee from his drowsy laundress; and then exerted himself vigorously
till nearly five o'clock in the morning, at which hour he sank,
exhausted, into bed.

During the ensuing day, sure enough, he received a communication signed
"_Simeon Spitfire_," and dated from "_Scorpion Court_," informing him
that its respectable writer "was instructed to apply to him, on the part
of Mr. Titmouse, for the immediate delivery up of two promissory notes
for £5,000 each, given by one Charles Aubrey to the aforesaid
Titmouse," and "begging Mr. Gammon's immediate attention thereto."
Gammon instantly copied out and sent an answer which he had carefully
prepared beforehand--taking very high ground indeed, but slipping in,
with a careful inadvertence, an encouraging admission of the strict
_legal_ right of Mr. Spitfire's client. 'T was, in short, a charming
letter--showing its writer to be one of the most fastidiously
high-minded men living; but producing not the least favorable effect
upon the mind of Mr. Spitfire, who instantly forwarded a formal and
peremptory demand of the two documents in question. Gammon wrote a
second letter, alluding to an unguarded (!) admission made in his former
communication, which he most devoutly hoped would not be used against
him; and in terms of touching and energetic eloquence, reasserted that,
though the letter of the law might be against him, he conceived that, in
point of honor, and indeed of justice, he was warranted in adhering to
the solemn promise which he had made to a gentleman for whom he
entertained the most profound respect; and, in short, he flatly refused
to give up the instruments demanded! Irrepressible was the exultation of
Mr. Spitfire, on finding himself getting so much the better of so astute
a person as Mr. Gammon! and he took an opportunity of showing to every
one who came to his little office, how Mr. Gammon had laid himself open
to the superior tactics of him--the aforesaid Mr. Spitfire!--He then,
with profound astuteness, wrote a fine flourishing letter to wind up the
correspondence, and stick into an affidavit; in the course of which he
apprised Mr. Gammon that the Court of King's Bench would be immediately
applied to, for a rule calling upon him, forthwith, to deliver up the
documents in question. On this, Mr. Gammon drew up an imposing and
admirable affidavit, setting forth all the correspondence; and, as soon
as he had been served with the rule _nisi_, he instructed Sir Charles
Wolstenholme, (the late Attorney-General,) Mr. Sterling, and Mr.
Crystal, to "_show cause_" against it; knowing, of course, quite as well
as did counsel, with whom he did not think it necessary to hold a
consultation, (for fear they should press him to give up the promissory
notes without showing cause,) that there was no earthly chance of
successfully resisting the rule.--When he took his seat under Sir
Charles, just before that learned person rose to show cause, he touched
Mr. Gammon on the shoulder, and very warmly complimented him on the
highly honorable and friendly feeling which he had manifested towards
the unfortunate Mr. Aubrey; but "feared that the case, as far as the
legal merits went, was too plain for argument;--but he had looked with
unusual care over the affidavits on which the rule had been obtained,
and at the _form_ of the rule itself--and rejoiced to say he felt
confident that he should be able to discharge it with costs:"--at which
Mr. Gammon turned suddenly pale--with joyous surprise, as Sir Charles
imagined--he not knowing Gammon so well as we do!--The reader is now in
a position to appreciate the following report of what took place--and
(_inter nos_) which said report had been drawn up for the _Morning
Growl_, by Mr. Gammon himself.

                    COURT OF KING'S BENCH. Yesterday.

                         (_Sittings in Banco._)

                          _Ex parte_ TITMOUSE.

     "This was a rule, obtained by Mr. SUBTLE on a previous day of the
     term, calling upon Mr. Gammon, of the firm of Quirk, Gammon, and
     Snap, of Saffron Hill, Hatton Garden, to show cause why he should
     not forthwith deliver up to Mr. Titmouse, M. P. for Yatton, two
     promissory notes, each for the payment, on demand to that
     gentleman, of £5,000, with interest, by Charles Aubrey. Sir CHARLES
     WOLSTENHOLME, Mr. STERLING, and Mr. CRYSTAL, now appeared to show
     cause--and took a preliminary objection to the form of the rule.
     After a very long discussion, the Court decided that the rule might
     be moulded so as to meet the facts of the case, and directed cause
     to be shown on the merits.

     "From the affidavits filed in answer to the rule, it appeared that,
     shortly after the termination of the late important case of _Doe
     dem. Titmouse_ v. _Jolter_, (in which, it will be recollected, the
     lessor of the plaintiff succeeded in establishing his right to very
     large estates in Yorkshire,) Mr. Gammon had been very active in
     endeavoring to effect an amicable arrangement concerning the mesne
     profits; and, after great exertions, had persuaded his client Mr.
     Titmouse to enter into an arrangement highly advantageous to Mr.
     Aubrey--who was to be released, (as we understood,) from no less a
     sum than Sixty Thousand Pounds, due in respect of the mesne
     profits, on giving the two promissory notes which were the subject
     of the present application. It further appeared, that on obtaining
     Mr. Aubrey's signature to these promissory notes, Mr. Gammon had
     explicitly and repeatedly assured him that he need be under no
     apprehension of being called on for payment for several years; but
     that the notes should remain in the hands of Mr. Gammon, and should
     not be put in suit till after a twelvemonth's notice should have
     been given to Mr. Aubrey. It did not distinctly appear whether Mr.
     Titmouse was ever made aware of this understanding between Mr.
     Gammon and Mr. Aubrey--at all events, nothing had ever passed in
     writing upon the subject. Mr. Gammon, on the contrary, frankly
     admitted it to be _possible_ that Mr. Titmouse might have been
     under the impression, while surrendering so great a claim against
     Mr. Aubrey, that the sum secured by the two promissory notes was to
     have been before this time liquidated. There was no affidavit made
     on the subject by Mr. Aubrey. It also appeared that Mr. Titmouse
     had not hitherto received any portion of the large amount, £20,000,
     yet due in respect of the mesne profits. The affidavits read by
     the Attorny-General set forth a correspondence which had taken
     place between Mr. Titmouse's solicitor and Mr. Gammon, in which the
     latter insisted, in the most strenuous terms, upon the _honorable_
     engagement under which he conceived himself to be to Mr. Aubrey,
     and solemnly declared his belief that Mr. Aubrey was under a
     similar impression; at the same time, there were expressions in Mr.
     Gammon's letters, from which it was plain that he was aware of the
     right, in point of strict law, of Mr. Titmouse, to the documents in
     question. It also appeared from the affidavits of Mr. Titmouse, and
     was not denied by those of Mr. Gammon, that the former had
     repeatedly urged the latter to deliver up the notes, or commence
     proceedings against Mr. Aubrey--but that Mr. Gammon had, on all
     such occasions previous to the present one, succeeded in dissuading
     him from his purpose. It had, moreover, been alleged on behalf of
     Mr. Titmouse, that Mr. Gammon was acting in collusion with Mr.
     Aubrey to defeat the just claim of Mr. Titmouse; but this Sir
     Charles Wolstenholme indignantly disclaimed on the part of Mr.
     Gammon, whose conduct throughout showed the nicest sense of honor,
     and the utmost possible anxiety to interfere between an unfortunate
     gentleman and utter ruin. But,

     "The COURT, without calling on Mr. SUBTLE, (with whom were Mr.
     GOOSE and Mr. MUD,) said the rule must clearly be made absolute.
     The legal right of Mr. Titmouse to the notes was admitted by Mr.
     Gammon's own affidavit; and there was no pretence for holding that,
     as against Mr. Titmouse, Mr. Gammon, who was only _one_ of that
     gentleman's attorneys, had any right to withhold the documents in
     question. No authority from Mr. Titmouse to Mr. Gammon to make the
     alleged representations to Mr. Aubrey, had been shown, and
     consequently that gentleman could in no way be bound by them. He
     was not even shown to have been aware of them. It was not pretended
     that Mr. Gammon, or any of his partners, had any lien on the notes,
     which must be therefore given up to Mr. Titmouse. With respect to
     the imputation against Mr. Gammon, of being in collusion with Mr.
     Aubrey, Lord Widdrington added, that from what his Lordship himself
     knew of Mr. Aubrey, it was impossible for a moment to imagine him
     capable of anything inconsistent with the strictest honor; and that
     Mr. Gammon's conduct showed that, though mistaken as to the extent
     of his power over the notes intrusted to him, he had acted from the
     purest motives, and evinced an honorable anxiety to serve the
     interests of one whom he believed to be unfortunate.--The rule was
     then made absolute; but on Mr. Subtle applying for the costs, the
     remainder of the day was occupied in an elaborate discussion upon
     the question--which, however, was eventually referred to the
     Master."

Nor was this all. The intelligent editor of the _Morning Growl_,
happening to cast his eye over the above, while lying in proofs, made it
the subject of an eloquent leading article, in which were contained many
just and striking reflections on the continual inconsistency between law
(as administered in England) and justice--of which the present--he
said--was a glaring instance. It was truly lamentable--it seemed--to
find truth and honor, generosity and justice, all sacrificed to the
wretched technicalities, the petty quirks and quibbles, of the
law--which required a radical reform. Indeed, the whole system of our
jurisprudence called for the most searching revision, which, he hoped,
would ere long take place. Then followed some powerful animadversions
upon the conduct of Lord Widdrington, in giving effect to such
pettifogging subterfuges as had that day served plainly to defeat the
ends of justice; and the article concluded by calling upon us Lordship
to resign his seat on the bench! and make way for a more liberal and
enlightened successor, who would decide every case that came before him,
according to the dictates of natural equity and common sense, without
being trammelled by such considerations as at present fettered and
impeded the due administration of justice. It did so happen, _inter
nos_, that this same incompetent Lord Widdrington had called down upon
himself and his court the foregoing philippic, by having imposed a smart
fine upon the publisher of the _Morning Growl_, and super-added a
twelvemonth's imprisonment, for an execrable libel upon an amiable and
dignified ecclesiastic; and this, too, his Lordship had done, after
overruling an almost interminable series of frivolous and vexatious
technical objections to the proceedings, urged by the defendant's
counsel, in conformity with the instructions which he had received, to
take every possible advantage.




CHAPTER VI.


At the earliest moment at which Mr. Aubrey could, without suspicion,
extricate himself from the embraces of his overjoyed wife, sister, and
children, on his return to Vivian Street, he withdrew to his study, in
order--professedly--to despatch some letters; but really to peruse the
paper which had been given to him by Mr. Runnington, with such ominous
significance. His eye soon caught the words "_Ex parte_ Titmouse"--and
he glanced over the above report of the proceedings, with exceeding
agitation. He read it over twice or thrice, and felt really sick at
heart.

"Oh, unfathomable Gammon!" he exclaimed at length, aloud, laying down
the paper, and sinking into his chair. "Surely I am the weakest, or you
the subtlest of mankind!" He turned over in his thoughts everything that
he could recollect of Gammon's conduct, from the first moment that they
had met. He felt completely baffled and bewildered. Again he perused the
report of the proceedings in the King's Bench--and would have again
relapsed into thought; but his eye happened to alight on two or three
notes lying on his table, where they had been placed by Fanny, having
come in his absence. He opened the first listlessly, not knowing the
handwriting; but, on unfolding it, he started violently on recognizing
that of Gammon, within; and with mingled wonder and fear, read as
follows:--

                                                       _"Thavies' Inn._

     "DEAR SIR,--Heaven only knows when or where these hasty lines will
     find you. I am forced to address them to Vivian Street, being in
     total ignorance of your intended movements. If you have not taken
     my advice, and withdrawn from the kingdom, I know not what grievous
     indignity may not have befallen you. You may have been torn from
     your family, and now incarcerated in prison, the victim of a most
     cruel and inveterate rapacity. My conscience bears me witness that
     I can say--I can do--no more for you. I am grossly
     misrepresented--I am insulted, by having base and sinister motives
     attributed to me, for my conduct towards you--for my anxious and
     repeated interference on your behalf. In the _Morning Growl_ of
     to-day you will probably see--if you have not already seen--the
     report of some proceedings against me, yesterday, in the Court of
     King's Bench. It may apprise you of _the last_ desperate stand I
     have made for you. It is with bitter regret--it is with a feeling
     of deep indignation, that I tell you I am unable to fulfil my
     solemn, my deliberate, my repeated promise to you concerning the
     two promissory notes which you deposited with me, in implicit
     reliance on my honor. Alas! you must prepare for the worst! Mr.
     Titmouse and his new adviser can have, of course, but _one object_
     in requiring the surrender of the two promissory notes, which I
     have already been compelled to give up, under peril of an
     attachment for contempt of court. I have strained, God knows! every
     nerve on your behalf; have all but fatally quarrelled with Mr.
     Titmouse, and with my partners; and I stand in some measure
     compromised, by the recent proceedings, before the profession and
     the public--and _all in vain_! Yet, once more--if you are not
     blinded and infatuated beyond all example or belief--I implore you,
     in the name of Heaven--by every consideration that should influence
     a man of honor and of feeling--fly!--lose not a second after
     reading these lines, (which I entreat you to destroy when read,) or
     _that second_ may involve your ruin--and the ruin of all connected
     with you! Believe me, your distressed--your unalterable friend,

                                                                 "O. G."

Mr. Aubrey laid down this letter; and sinking back again into his chair,
yielded for some moments to an impulse very nearly akin to despair. "Oh
God!" he exclaimed, pressing his hand against his aching forehead--"to
what hast Thou destined us, Thy wretched creatures!--I am forbidden to
believe--I cannot--I will not believe--that Thou hast made us only to
torment us; yet, alas! my spirit is at length drooping under these
accumulated evils!--Oh God! oh God! I am blind. Give me sight, to
discern Thy will concerning me!--Oh give me not up to despair! _Break
not the bruised reed!_ _Quench not the smoking flax!_--What is to become
of me? Is this man Thy messenger of evil to me? Is he the subtle and
vindictive fiend I fear him to be? What can be his object--his
motive--for resorting to such tortuous and complicated scheming against
us as must be his _if_ he be playing the hypocrite?--or is he really
what he represents himself? And am I guilty of groundless distrust--of
gross ingratitude?--What shall I think, what can I do? Oh my God,
preserve my senses to me--my understanding! My brain seems reeling! My
perceptions are becoming disturbed!--Perhaps this very night the
frightful scene of the morning may be acted over again! again my
bleeding heart be torn from those it loves--to whom Thou hast united
it!"--A deep sigh, or rather groan, burst from him; and leaning over the
table, he buried his face in his hands, and remained for some time in
that posture.

"What am I to do?" he presently inquired, rising, and walking to and
fro. "_Fly_--he says! Were I weak and unprincipled enough to do so,
should I not, in all human probability, fall into the deepest pit he has
dug for me?--but be that as it may--_fly_ I will not! Never! Never!
Those dear--those precious beings in yonder room"--his heart thrilled
within him--"may weep for me, but shall never BLUSH for me!"

"Why--how horrid is my position!" he presently exclaimed to himself!
"Ten thousand pounds and upwards, must either I pay, or Lord De la
Zouch for me, within a few months;--here is a second ten thousand
pounds, with nearly five hundred pounds of interest; I have been to-day
arrested for nearly fifteen hundred pounds; and this man Titmouse holds
my bond for two thousand pounds more, and interest! Is it, then, Thy
will, O God! that I am to sink beneath my troubles? Am I to perish from
Thy sight? To be crushed beneath Thy displeasure?--Or merciful
Father!--wilt THOU save me, _when there is none other to help_?"

Calmness seemed stealing insensibly over his troubled spirits; his
agitated feelings sank gradually into an indescribable and wonderful
repose; in that dismal moment of extreme suffering, his soul became
blessedly sensible of its relationship to God;--that he was not the
miserable victim of _chance_--as the busy spirit of darkness incessantly
whispered in his ear--but in the hands of the _Father of the spirits of
all flesh_, who listened, in his behalf, to the pleading of One _touched
with the feeling of our infirmities_--_who was in all points tempted,
even as we are_. His fainting soul felt sustained by the grace for which
it had sought; the oil and balm of a sound scriptural consolation were
poured into his wounds. Before his quickened eye arose many bright
figures of those who had gloriously overcome the fiercest assaults of
the Evil One, resisting even unto death:--he felt for a moment
_compassed about by a great cloud of witnesses_ to the mercy and
goodness of God. Oh, in that moment, how, wonderfully little seemed the
sorrows which had before appeared so great! He felt, in a manner, at
once humbled and exalted. Invisible support clung to his confident
soul--as if he were surrounded by the arm of Him _who will not suffer us
to be tempted above what we are able; but will, with the temptation,
also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it_. He sank
silently upon his knees; and with clasped hands, and his face raised
towards heaven, with profound contrition of spirit, yet with firm faith,
besought the mercy which God has promised to those who thus will ask for
it. Thus occupied, he did not perceive the door gently opened, and by
Mrs. Aubrey--who, closing it hastily after her, flung her arm round his
neck, sinking down beside him, and in a low, fond voice, exclaimed--"Oh,
my own love! My own Charles! My poor, oppressed, persecuted,
heart-broken husband! Pray for me--me also!" He gently returned her
embrace, looking at her unutterable things; and after they had remained
thus for a few moments, they arose. He gazed at her with unspeakable
tenderness, and a countenance full of serenity and resignation. He
gently soothed her agitated feelings, and succeeded in communicating to
her a measure of the composure which he experienced himself. Before they
had quitted that little room, he had even apprised her faithfully of the
peril which momentarily menaced them; and again the cold waters gushed
over her soul. At length, however, she had recovered her self-possession
sufficiently to return to the room she had quitted, and instantly
blanched Miss Aubrey's cheek by communicating the new terrors which
threatened them.

Just as they were finishing dinner--a mere mockery, however, of a
meal--a double knock at the door occasioned them all not a little
agitation; but, as the event proved, needlessly, since it announced the
arrival of only their kind, experienced friend, Mr. Runnington--who
evidently felt infinitely relieved at finding that Mrs. Aubrey and Miss
Aubrey had been made acquainted by Mr. Aubrey with the additional source
of apprehension afforded by the report of the preceding day's doings in
the King's Bench. Mr. Runnington felt assured that within twenty-four
hours' time, proceedings would be taken against Mr. Aubrey; whom,
however, he reminded, that as in the former, so in the anticipated case,
the extent of his immediate anxiety would be the finding bail for so
very serious an amount; but that difficulty surmounted, he would be safe
from personal annoyance and apprehension till the ensuing November. Mr.
Aubrey then apprised Mr. Runnington of the death of Lady Stratton, and
the grievous events connected with it, amid the tears and sobs of Mrs.
Aubrey and Kate. Though he said but little, his countenance showed how
much he was shocked by the intelligence. "Never in my experience," at
length he observed, "a thirty-six years' experience in the profession,
have I heard of, or met with, such a case of complicated misfortune as
yours! 'But it is,' as the old proverb has it, 'a long lane that has no
turning.' We must trust, my dear sir, to the chapter of accidents."

"Oh, Mr. Runnington!" interrupted Aubrey, with animation, "there _is_ no
such thing!--It is the _order of Providence_!"

They then entered into a long conversation; in the course of which--"If
our fears--our worst fears--be confirmed," observed Runnington, "and
they venture to put in suit these two notes--then they will have thrown
down the gauntlet. I'll take it up--and there's no knowing what may
happen when we come to close quarters. First and foremost, I'll tax away
every farthing of the alleged 'balance' of their monstrous bill--ay,
I'll stake my reputation on it, that I leave them not a shilling; but,
on the contrary, prove that you have already greatly overpaid them."

"Alas! have I not, however, pledged myself to Mr. Gammon _not_ to do
so?" interrupted Aubrey.

"Pshaw!--Forgive me, but this is absurd. Indeed, Mr. Aubrey, it is
really out-heroding Herod! All is fair against adversaries such as
these! Besides, if you must be so scrupulous and fastidious--and I
honor you for it--there's another way of putting it, which I fancy
settles the matter. By Mr. Titmouse putting these bills in suit, Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's promise to you is not performed--it is broken;
and so there is an end of yours, which is dependent upon the performance
of theirs."

"That is only on the supposition that they are playing me false--whereas
the proceedings yesterday in court, especially when coupled with Mr.
Gammon's letters to me"----

"All hollow! hollow!" replied Mr. Runnington, shaking his head.--"False
and hypocritical! Who could trust to _Gammon_? This fellow Titmouse,
whom they are doubtless fleecing daily, is, in all probability,
desperately driven for ready money; and they have allowed him to get
hold of these two bills, after a sham resistance on the part of Gammon,
in order to call forward your friends to the rescue--that's their game,
depend upon it!" Mr. Aubrey fired at the bare thought. "Yet I must own I
am at a loss to discover what motive or object Mr. Gammon can have for
going so far out of his way to secure your good opinion, or for wrapping
himself in so impenetrable a disguise. He is a very, very deep devil,
that Gammon; and, depend upon it, has some sinister purpose to effect,
which you will by-and-by discover!" Mr. Aubrey then, for the first time,
acquainted Mr. Runnington with Gammon's recent proposals to Miss Aubrey,
at which Mr. Runnington seemed for some moments struck dumb with
astonishment.

"I presume," at length said he, turning with a brief and sad smile
towards Miss Aubrey, whose reddening cheek betokened the interest she
felt in the conversation--"I presume, Miss Aubrey, there is no chance of
our seeing you pass into--Mrs. Gammon?"

"I should rather think not, Mr. Runnington," she replied with sufficient
loftiness of manner; "and I am quite at a loss, to conceive what could
possibly have put such a thing into his head."

"Certainly, Mr. Runnington," said Aubrey, "I can undertake to say that
my sister never gave him any encouragement."

"Encouragement?--Horrid man!" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, with great
vivacity. "I could never bear him--you know it, Charles--so do you,
Agnes!" Mr. Runnington made no further observations on the subject,
though his thoughts were very busy; he was satisfied that he was
beginning to discover a clew to much of Gammon's conduct--for that that
gentleman was acting with profound duplicity, Mr. Runnington entertained
no doubt whatever; and he resolved to watch his every motion connected
with Mr. Aubrey closely.

"What will be the earliest period;" inquired Mr. Aubrey, "at which Mr.
Titmouse, if so disposed, can put in suit my bond given to the late Lady
Stratton?"

"As soon as he has obtained the grant of letters of administration,
which cannot take place till the end of fourteen days from her
Ladyship's death--that being one difference, as you are aware, between
the powers of an executor and an administrator." Mr. Aubrey sighed; and
made no reply; while Mr. Runnington looked at him for some moments in
silence, as if doubting whether to mention something which had occurred
to him. At length--"Of course, Mr. Aubrey," he commenced, "one does not
like to raise groundless hopes or fears; but, do you know, I am by no
means free from doubts as to the reality of Lady Stratton's
intestacy--whether the draft of her proposed will, brought to her by Mr.
Parkinson, could not be admitted to probate. Very--very nice questions,
as you must be aware, often arise out of cases like these! Since seeing
you this morning, I have written off to Mr. Parkinson for full and
accurate information on the point; and if I get a satisfactory answer,
with your consent I will certainly lodge a _caveat_ against the grant of
titles of administration. That would indeed checkmate them! But I have
very slight hopes indeed of receiving such an answer as one could wish,"
added Mr. Runnington, fearful of exciting fruitless expectations.
Shortly afterwards, Miss Aubrey, who had appeared for some little time
laboring under considerable excitement, addressing her brother, said
with evident embarrassment--"Charles, I am very anxious to mention
something that has occurred to me of a very singular nature--if you
think I am at liberty to do so; and I shall first ask you and Mr.
Runnington, whether, under the circumstances, you consider me entitled
to disclose what I allude to."

"Kate, Kate!--what is this?--What do you mean? You quite alarm me!"
inquired her brother, with an amazed air.

"Suppose Mr. Gammon, on the occasion of his calling upon me, which has
been recently mentioned, volunteered a statement of a very, very
extraordinary description--one that has ever since quite _haunted_ me,
day and night. Mind, Charles--I say that, in the first instance, he
_volunteered_ it, only expressing an earnest wish that I should mention
it to no one; on which I said I should make no promise, but act as I
might think proper; and after my saying this, he made the communication
I allude to. _Should_ I be at liberty," continued Miss Aubrey, eagerly
and anxiously, "now to disclose what he told me? I am dying to do it, if
I may, honorably."

"My dear Kate, I really fear you are wandering--that you are overcome
with the sufferings you have gone through to-day," said her brother,
tenderly, and with infinite concern.

"Indeed, Charles, I am not," she answered with great earnestness.

"Then I am of opinion that you may most certainly mention anything so
communicated to you--I have no doubt, Kate."

"Nor I, Miss Aubrey," added Mr. Runnington, eagerly; "nay, I go
farther--with a man like him, I think it is your _duty_ to disclose
anything he may have said to you."

Miss Aubrey paused for a few moments, and then mentioned the singular
circumstance with which the reader is already acquainted; namely, Mr.
Gammon's distinct and solemn assurance to her, that he possessed the
power of restoring her brother to the possession of Yatton; and that,
too, by legal and honorable means; and that, if she would but promise to
receive him as her suitor, he would pledge himself to replace them all
at Yatton before claiming the performance of that promise.

Mr. Aubrey, Mrs. Aubrey, and Mr. Runnington, all listened to this
strange story in silence, and gazed in astonishment at the beautiful and
excited speaker.

"Forgive me, dear madam," said Mr. Runnington, at length, exchanging an
incredulous glance with her brother, "if I--I--express a doubt whether
you may not be laboring under a complete misconception"----

"'T is impossible, Kate!" added her brother; but he knew, at the same
time, his sister's strong sense; and all doubt vanished both from his
mind and that of Mr. Runnington on her calmly and distinctly repeating
what she had just said--giving even the very expressions made use of by
Mr. Gammon, and which, she said, they might easily believe had made a
very deep impression on her mind.

"It's inconceivable!" exclaimed her brother, after a long pause.

"It's an audacious and cruel falsehood, in my opinion," said Mr.
Runnington: and all again were silent. Then he hastily ran his mind's
eye over the main points in the late proceedings by which Mr. Aubrey had
been ejected from Yatton. "Either," he continued after a pause, "he is a
gross liar, or is laboring under insanity--or there has been shocking,
atrocious villany practised against you. If he be in his senses, and be
speaking the truth--gracious Heaven! he must have brought forward a
series of perjured witnesses at the trial."

"Did he drop any hint, Kate, as to the _means_ by which he could bring
about such a result?" inquired her brother, after a long pause, during
which he too had been, like Mr. Runnington, reflecting on the course of
proof by which the case of Titmouse had been supported.

"No--not the remotest; of that I am certain. I observed that
particularly; though shortly afterwards, I was so overcome by what he
had said, and also by the manner in which he said it, that I fainted.
Mr. Gammon must have carried me to the sofa; for when I revived, I was
lying there--though, when I felt myself losing my consciousness, I was
standing near the window, which I had risen to open."

"It's the most amazing thing I ever heard in my life, I protest!"
exclaimed Mr. Runnington, thoughtfully; while Mr. Aubrey rose from his
chair, and walked a few steps to and fro, obviously laboring under much
excitement.

"Kate, Kate!" said he, rather vehemently, "you should have told me this
the instant that you next saw me!"

"For Heaven's sake, be calm, dearest Charles!" cried Mrs. Aubrey,
herself not a little agitated by the extraordinary intelligence just
communicated by Kate, for the first time, even to _her_. Poor Kate, on
seeing the way in which her communication had been received, heartily
regretted having mentioned the matter.

"This will require very great consideration, Mr. Aubrey, to know how to
deal with it, and with Gammon," said Mr. Runnington. "I am inclined to
think, at present, that he would hardly have ventured upon so outrageous
a piece of folly, as making such a representation as this, had there
been no foundation for it in fact; and yet, I am quite astonished that a
man so acute, so signally self-possessed, should have so committed
himself--he must have been under some great excitement at the moment."

"He certainly was, or at least seemed, a good deal agitated while he was
with me," quoth Kate, coloring a little.

"That is highly probable, Miss Aubrey," replied Mr. Runnington, with a
faint smile. "It must have appeared to him as one of the most likely
occurrences, that Miss Aubrey should mention to you, Mr. Aubrey, so
extraordinary a circumstance! It is very, very difficult to imagine Mr.
Gammon thrown off his guard on any occasion." Then ensued an anxious and
prolonged conversation on the subject, in which many conjectures were
made, but without leading to any satisfactory issue. Quite a new light,
however, seemed now thrown upon all his past acts, and the whole tenor
of his conduct. They read over his last two notes with new and deep
interest, on the supposition that while writing them, he was conscious
of possessing the power which he had represented. All was mystery. Then
was discussed the question, as to the propriety of either Mr. Runnington
or Mr. Aubrey applying to Mr. Gammon upon the subject--a step which was,
however, postponed for future and more mature consideration. Another
thing suggested itself to Mr. Aubrey, but he kept it to himself:--should
he forthwith apprise Mr. Gammon of the fact that Kate was absolutely
engaged to Mr. Delamere, and so at once and forever extinguish all hope
on the part of Mr. Gammon?

The evening, however, was now advancing, and Mr. Runnington pressed upon
Mr. Aubrey the object which he had chiefly had in view in calling--viz.
to prevail on Mrs. Aubrey and himself to accompany him immediately to
his country house, which lay in the direction of Richmond, at about six
miles' distance from town; and where, for a brief interval, they might
enjoy a respite from the frightful suspense and danger to which they
were at present exposed in Vivian Street. Mrs. Aubrey and Kate most
earnestly seconded the kind importunities of Mr. Runnington; and after
considerable hesitation Mr. Aubrey consented. It was accordingly
arranged that, Mr. Runnington's carriage not being in town, he should
return, within an hour, with a glass-coach; and that, during the ensuing
day, Mrs. Runnington should drive to town for the purpose of bringing
back with her Miss Aubrey, and little Charles and Agnes. This having
been determined upon, Mr. Runnington quitted them, promising to return
within an hour, when he hoped to find them ready to start, and equipped
for a several days' sojourn. As soon as he had left the house, Mr.
Aubrey's scruples began to revive; it appeared to him, that though it
might be for a short time only, still it was, in effect, an absconding
from his creditors: and there is no knowing but that his fastidious
misgivings, his delicate sense of rectitude, might have led him after
all to send off Mrs. Aubrey alone, when, poor soul! he was spared the
trial by an incident which occurred about half an hour after Mr.
Runnington's departure. Mrs. Aubrey was sitting in the parlor in
travelling dress, fondling little Agnes, and talking earnestly to Kate
about the management of the two children, and other matters; while Mr.
Aubrey, also ready to start, was in the study selecting a book or two
to take with him, when a heavy single knock at the door, unaccompanied
by the sound of coach-wheels, nearly paralyzed all three of them.
Suffice it to say, that within a few minutes' time the wretched and
almost heart-broken Aubrey was a second time in custody, and at the suit
of Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq., M. P., for the principal sum of ten
thousand pounds, and interest for twelve months, at the rate of five
pounds _per centum per annum_. The agonizing scene which ensued I shall
leave entirely to the reader's imagination--observing only, that the two
minions of the law into whose hands Aubrey had now fallen, seemed
totally indifferent to the anguish they witnessed. The chief was a
well-known sheriff's officer--one VICE; short, fat, bloated; deeply
pitted with the small-pox; close-cut black hair, almost as coarse as
that of a hog; while the expression of his features was at once callous
and insolent. Aubrey perceived at a glance that he had no consideration
or mercy to expect at the hands of such a man as this; and the follower
very much resembled his master.

"You're my prisoner, sir," said Vice, walking up to Aubrey, and with an
air of matter-of-fact brutality taking hold of his collar with one hand,
while in the other he held out his warrant. "If you like to clap a
great-coat on, as it's getting late, you may; but the sooner you're off
out of the way of all this here noise, the better--I should say."

"For God's sake wait for a few minutes--I have a friend coming," said
Aubrey, his wife clinging to his arm.

"D----d if I wait a moment, that's flat!" quoth Vice, glancing at the
two boxes in the passage, and guessing from them, and the travelling
dress of Mrs. Aubrey, that he had arrived just in the very nick of time
to prevent an escape.

"For the love of Heaven, stay only five minutes!" cried Kate,
passionately wringing her hands--but she might as well have addressed a
blacksmith's anvil as either of the men who were now masters of her
doomed brother's person.

"'Tis useless, Kate--'tis in vain, my love!" said he, with a melancholy
air; and turning to Vice, who, with his companion, stood at only a few
inches' distance from him--"perhaps you will allow me to write down the
address of the place you are taking me to?" he inquired somewhat
sternly.

"Write away then, and make haste; for, write or not write, you're off in
two minutes' time!"

Mr. Aubrey hastily wrote down in pencil, for Mr. Runnington,
"Vice--Squeezum Court, Carey Street, Lincoln's-Inn Fields;" and then,
having hastily drawn on his great-coat, without taking with him even a
change of linen, (for Vice would seem to have got the idea of a rescue
into his head, and was, besides, anxious to run not the least risk with
a _ten thousand pounds' debtor_), tore himself from the frenzied embrace
of his wife and sister, and quitted the house. Vice had refused even to
let his man go in quest of a hackney-coach, or to wait while Fanny ran
for one; and the moment they had got into the street, the cries of Mrs.
Aubrey and Kate yet ringing in Mr. Aubrey's ears, Vice put his arm with
rough familiarity into that of Mr. Aubrey, directing his follower to do
the same; and in this style they hurried Mr. Aubrey along the whole of
the distance between Vivian Street and Squeezum Court; he uttering not
one single word--but his heart almost bursting. Vice had received his
instructions from Mr. Spitfire, who was a very dashing practitioner; and
perfectly well knowing the value of every day towards the close of term,
had got his affidavit of debt prepared and ready sworn, and everything
in readiness, even before the rule had been made absolute against Mr.
Gammon. As the two captors and their prize--a gentleman between two
ruffians--passed at a smart pace along the streets, they attracted
considerable attention; now and then, even a little crowd would follow
them for half the length of the street. Once Mr. Aubrey caught the
words--"Poor fellow! Forgery, no doubt--he's a dead man in a month!"[11]

Vice's lock-up was, though similar in its general appearance, yet of a
much inferior description to that of Grab. It was smaller and meaner.
They reached it a little after eight o'clock.

"Are you for the parlor, or the common room?" inquired Vice, as soon as
they had entered the house.

"Which you please," replied Aubrey, quickly and gloomily.

"P'r'aps you 'd better show the gemman up-stairs," said the follower,
hesitatingly, to his master.

"You pay extra up-stairs," quoth Vice; "which shall it be?"

"I have no money, sir, to spare--I know the extortionating practices
which "----

"Oh, come along then!" replied Vice, insolently; and in a minute or two
Mr. Aubrey found himself in a tolerably large, but low room, at the back
of the house, lit by three or four candles. There were some ten or
twelve persons in it, who were smoking, drinking, reading the
newspapers, playing at cards, dice, pitchfarthing, and so forth. All
seemed in good spirits, and suspended for a moment their various
occupations to scrutinize the newcomer--on whom the door was in a
twinkling closed and locked.

"Now, sir, just in time to cut in," said a thin pale man--his breath
redolent of the stench of gin--stepping briskly up to him from a table
at which he and two others had just begun to play a rubber. "Now, sir,"
he continued in a confident tone, running the edges of the cards rapidly
through his fingers with the air of an adept, and then proffering the
pack to Mr. Aubrey.

"I do not play," replied Aubrey, in a low tone.

"Better take a card--drive dull care away; you'll be devilish dull here
without play of some sort!"

"I do not play, sir--I certainly shall not," repeated Mr. Aubrey,
somewhat peremptorily.

"Only half-crown points--can't hurt you," he continued flippantly; till
Mr. Aubrey walked from him with an air of disgust towards another part
of the room.

"You're a liar!" said one of two men playing at drafts to the other, a
dispute having arisen about the game, as Mr. Aubrey passed them.

"You're a cheat!" was the answer; on which the man so addressed suddenly
and violently flung a half-empty tumbler of brandy and water at the
other; it took effect on the forehead of his companion, who fell stunned
from his chair, his forehead, which had been cut open, bleeding
profusely. On this there was a general rush towards the spot. In the
midst of this sickening scene the door was opened by Vice.

"Hollo--what's the matter?" said he, locking the door after him, and
coming up to the group round the fallen and miserable man who had been
struck.

"Who did it?" cried he, fiercely, on catching sight of the prostrate
man.

"I did," answered the perpetrator of the outrage, "he called me a
cheat."

"_You did!_" quoth Vice, suddenly grasping him by the collar, as with
the hand of a giant, and forcing him, despite his struggling, down to
the floor, when he put one knee on his breast, and then shook him till
he began to get black in the face.

"D--n it, Vice, don't _murder_ him!" cried one of the bystanders--all of
whom seemed disposed to interfere; but at this point, the man who had
been struck, and had been lying for some minutes motionless, suddenly
began to dash about his arms and legs convulsively--for he had fallen
into a fit of epilepsy. The attention of all present was now absorbed by
this one dreadful figure; and the man whom Vice had quitted, rose
flushed and breathless from the floor, and looked with a face of horror
upon the victim of his ungovernable passions.

"I must get a doctor," quoth Vice, "presently," approaching the door;
and in passing Mr. Aubrey, who sat down looking exceedingly
agitated--"Oh--here you are!" said he: "come along with me."

"I hope this poor man will be properly attended to"----interposed Mr.
Aubrey, very anxiously.

"That's _my_ look-out, not yours," replied Vice, rudely--"come you along
with me!" and, unlocking the door, he motioned out Mr. Aubrey, and after
sending off a man for a surgeon, led Mr. Aubrey into a kind of
office--where he was instantly clasped by the hands by Mr. Runnington,
who had been there some five minutes. He looked like an angel in the
eyes of Mr. Aubrey, who returned his cordial pressure with convulsive
energy, but in silence, for his shocked and overcharged feelings forbade
him utterance. Mr. Runnington looked both annoyed and distressed--for
Vice had refused to discharge his prisoner on Mr. Runnington's
undertaking, telling him the sum was a trifle too large for running any
risk; and, in short, he peremptorily refused to do it without a written
authority from the under-sheriff; and added, he knew it was useless for
Mr. Runnington to make the application--for they had only a few months
before been "let in" for eight hundred pounds in that same way--so that
Mr. Runnington had better, said Vice, be looking after a good
bail-bond. In a word, Vice was inexorable; and a hint of the possibility
of Mr. Aubrey's flight to the Continent, dropped by Mr. Spitfire to the
under-sheriff, had caused that functionary to advise Vice "to look sharp
after his bird."

"At all events let Mr. Aubrey be shown into your parlor, Vice," said Mr.
Runnington, "and I will settle with you when I return. I am just going
to the office, to see what I can do with Mr. Ridley."

"It's no manner of use; and besides, it's ten to one you don't catch
him--he's gone to Clapham by this time," said Vice, looking up at the
dusky Dutch clock over the fireplace. But Mr. Runnington was not to be
so easily discouraged, and started off on his friendly errand; on which
Vice led Mr. Aubrey up-stairs into his "parlor," telling him, as they
went along, that there were only two other "gentlemen" there, and so
"them three could make it comfortable to one another, if they liked."
Vice added, that as he had only one double-bedded room at liberty, they
must agree among themselves which should sleep on the sofa--or perhaps
take it by turns.

On entering the parlor two figures were visible; one that of a tall,
pale, emaciated, gentlemanly person of about forty, who lay on the sofa
languidly smoking a cigar, more apparently to assuage pain than for the
purpose of mere enjoyment. The other was a portly gray-haired man,
apparently about fifty, and also of gentlemanly appearance. He was
standing with his back to the fireplace--one hand thrust into his
waistcoat, and the other holding a tumbler, which he raised to his lips
as Vice entered, and having drained it, requested him to replenish it.
'T was the third tumbler of strong brandy and water which he had
despatched that evening; and his restless and excited eye, and voluble
utterance, testified to the influence of what he had been drinking. On
Vice's retiring, this gentleman began to address Mr. Aubrey in a rapid
and somewhat incoherent strain--telling him of the "accident" which had
that morning befallen him; for that Vice had laid his rough hand upon
him just as he was embarking in an Indiaman, off Blackwall, to bid
farewell to this "cursed country" forever. This man had been a great
merchant in the city; and, for a series of years, universally respected.
He had married a fashionable wife; and their ambition and absurd
extravagance, combined with losses unquestionably originating in a want
of confidence on the part of his mercantile connections, occasioned
solely by his ostentation, irregularities, and inattention to business,
drove him to gambling speculations. Unfortunate there, he took to
courses of downright dishonesty; availing himself of his character and
power as trustee, executor, and otherwise, to draw out of the funds,
from time to time, very large sums of money, to the utter ruin of some
twenty or thirty unfortunate families, whose deceased relatives had
quitted life with implicit confidence in his integrity. The guilty
splendor thus secured him lasted for some few years, when an accident
set him suddenly wrong;--a beautiful girl, for whom he was sole trustee,
and every farthing of whose fortune he had appropriated to his own
purposes, applied to him for the immediate settlement of her property.
The next morning he had stopped payment; Mincing Lane was in a
ferment--astonishment prevailed at the Exchange. Who could have thought
it! said everybody. He was nowhere to be seen or heard of--but at length
intelligence of his movements having been obtained by one of his
numerous distracted victims, led to his apprehension in the way which
has been already mentioned. Of all this, Mr. Aubrey, of course, could
know nothing--but, nevertheless, he was somewhat struck with the man's
countenance and manner; but with what awful interest would Mr. Aubrey
have regarded him, had he known that the miserable being before him had
determined upon self-destruction--and that within two days' time he
would actually accomplish his frightful purpose!--For he was found in
bed, a ghastly object, with his head almost severed from his body.

In the other--a ruined _roué_--Mr. Aubrey was infinitely shocked at
presently recognizing the features of one whom he had slightly known at
Oxford. This was a member of an ancient and honorable family, and born
to a princely fortune, which he had totally dissipated in every
conceivable mode of extravagance and profligacy, both at home and
abroad, and moreover, in doing so, had also ruined his constitution. He
had taken honors at Oxford, and was expected to have been very eminent
in Parliament. But at college his tendency to profligacy rapidly
developed itself. He became notorious for his debaucheries, and made
ostentation of his infidelity. He had returned from France only a few
days before, in an advanced stage of consumption; and having been
pounced upon by one of his numerous infuriate creditors, hither he had
been brought the evening before--and would be the next morning lodged in
the Fleet, as he could procure no bail; and there he might, possibly,
live till he could apply to take the benefit of the insolvent act. If he
should be successful in this last stroke, he could not possibly survive
it beyond a few weeks! And he had nothing then to look forward to, but a
pauper's burial.--He at length recognized Mr. Aubrey; and raising
himself up on the sofa, extended his wasted hand to his
fellow-collegian, who shook it kindly--much shocked at his appearance.
What a marvellous difference was there between the characters of these
two men!

After about half an hour's absence, Mr. Runnington returned, much
dispirited. Mr. Ridley was not to be found; and, consequently, Mr.
Aubrey must remain in his wretched quarters all night, and till probably
an advanced period of the ensuing day--till, in short, Mr. Runnington
should have obtained responsible sureties for his putting in bail to the
action. Having whispered a few words to Mr. Aubrey in the adjoining
room, and slipped a five-pound note into his hand, Mr. Runnington took
his leave, pledging himself to lose not one moment in procuring his
release; and charged with innumerable fond expressions to Mrs. Aubrey,
to Kate, and to his children--to whom Mr. Runnington promised to go that
night. "This is almost the bitterest moment of my life," faltered poor
Aubrey; "it is very hard to bear!" and he wrung Mr. Runnington's
hand--that gentleman being almost as much affected as his truly
unfortunate client; who, however, on being left by Mr. Runnington, felt
grateful indeed to the Almighty for so powerful and valuable a friend.

Neither Mr. Aubrey nor Mr. Somerville--that was the name of his early
acquaintance--quitted the sitting-room during the whole of the night;
but as their companion retired early to the adjoining apartment, and
immediately fell into heavy sleep, they at length entered into
conversation together--conversation of a melancholy, but deeply
interesting, and I may even add instructive character. Mr. Aubrey's
notes of it are by me; but I will not risk fatiguing the indulgent
reader's attention. When the chill gray morning broke, it found the two
prisoners still earnestly talking together; but, shortly afterwards,
nature yielded, and they both fell asleep--Mr. Aubrey with an humble and
fervent inward prayer, commending those dear beings who were absent to
the protection of Heaven, and imploring it also for himself.

Immediately on quitting Mr. Aubrey, Mr. Runnington, according to his
promise, went direct to Vivian Street, and the scene which he had
endeavored to prepare himself for encountering, on their finding him
return unaccompanied by Mr. Aubrey, was indeed most overpowering to his
feelings, and heart-rending. Alas! how confidently had they reckoned
upon an issue similar to that which had so happily occurred in the
morning!--'Twas the first time--the very first time--since their
troubles, that Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey had been separated for one single
night. And he was now the inmate of a prison! Mrs. Aubrey and Kate sat
up the livelong night--one memorable and miserable to them--counting
hour after hour, whose flight was announced by the neighboring church
clock. Their eyes were swollen with weeping, and their throbbing temples
ached, as, at the first glimpse of dull daybreak, they drew aside the
parlor curtain and threw open the window. They were, indeed, with some
of old, _weary of watching_.

About mid-day, thanks to the energetic friendship of Mr. Runnington, and
the promptitude of those whose names had been given to him by Mr.
Aubrey, he made his appearance in Vivian Street. He saw Mrs. Aubrey and
Kate as he passed, sitting at the window, anxiously on the look-out.
They also saw him--sprang to the door--and opening it while he was in
the act of knocking, they were instantly locked in each other's embrace.
He looked pale and harassed, certainly; but 'twas _he_, the beloved
husband and brother--Providence had permitted them once more to meet!
All their recent pangs were for a moment forgotten and drowned in the
overflowing joy of such a reunion. He was already sufficiently subdued;
but when he heard the footsteps of his children pattering rapidly
down-stairs--and heard their little voices continually, and in eager
accents, exclaiming, "Papa!--my papa!--where is papa?"--and when they
ran up to him, and he felt their little arms round his neck--then he was
overpowered--his lip quivered convulsively, and he could not refrain
from bursting into tears. Oh, 'twas HOME, poor oppressed soul!--after
all--to which Providence had permitted him to return, and where he saw
himself suddenly surrounded by those precious objects of his undivided
and unutterable love! Indeed, he was thankful; his heart--all their
hearts--overflowed with gratitude. Towards the evening, they received a
visit from Mr. and Mrs. Neville, who were infinitely shocked on hearing
of the events of the last few days, and of which they had not had the
slightest intimation, living, as they did, at so great a distance, and
not having seen their friends the Aubreys for several weeks. Poor souls!
they also had their troubles--'twas wonderful how they contrived to
exist upon the paltry pittance obtained by his ministerial duties; but
they came ever with cheerfulness--unaffected and refreshing
cheerfulness; they never uttered a murmur at the thorny desert which
life seemed destined to prove to them, but had always a comfortable word
for their weary fellow-pilgrims. What a happy evening they passed
together! Poor Neville was in high spirits; for an article of his, full
of profound research and delicate criticism, which had cost him a great
deal of labor to prepare, had at length been accepted by the editor of a
classical and ecclesiastical Review, who had forwarded to him a check
for ten guineas. Mr. Aubrey could scarce refrain from tears, when his
simple-minded and generous friend pressed upon him the acceptance of, at
least, the half of these, the unexpected proceeds of his severe and
ill-requited toil. While they were thus sitting together, in eager and
delightful conversation, there came a knock to the door, which, as may
be easily believed, a little disturbed them all; but it proved to be a
gentleman who asked for Miss Aubrey; and on her requesting him to come
forward, who should it be but the "gentleman" of my Lord De la Zouch;
and while the color mounted into her cheek, and her heart fluttered, he
placed in her hands a packet, which had just arrived from the Continent.

They all insisted on having it opened then and there; and in a few
minutes' time, behold! their eager admiring eyes were feasted by the
sight of a most superb diamond necklace--and at the bottom of the case
was a small card--which Kate, blushing violently, thrust into her bosom,
in spite of all Mrs. Aubrey's efforts. There was a long letter addressed
to Mr. Aubrey from Lord De la Zouch, who, with Lady De la Zouch, had
been for some weeks at Paris--and one from her Ladyship to Kate; and,
from its bulky appearance, 'twas evident either that Lady De la Zouch
must have written her a prodigiously long letter, or enclosed one to her
from _some one else_. They saw Kate's uneasiness about this same letter,
and considerately forbore to rally her upon it. Poor girl!--she burst
into tears when she looked at the glittering trinket which had been
presented to her--and reflected that its cost would probably be more
than would suffice to support her brother and his family for years! Her
heart yearned towards them, and she longed to convert her splendid
present into a form that should minister to their necessities. While
touching upon this part of my history--which I always approach with
diffident reluctance, as matter too delicate to be handled before the
public--I must nevertheless pause for a moment, and apprise the reader
of one or two little circumstances, before returning to the main course
of the narrative.

Mr. Delamere was at that moment at Rome, in the course of making the
usual tour of Europe, and was not expected to return to England for some
months--perhaps for a year. But before quitting England, he had laid
close siege to our beautiful Kate; and had, indeed, obtained from her a
promise, that if ever she became any one's wife, it should be his. That
their engagement was sanctioned most cordially by Lord and Lady De la
Zouch--two persons of as generous and noble a spirit as breathed in the
world--must have been long ago abundantly manifest to the reader; and
they did not the less appreciate the value of the prize secured by their
son, because of the proud and delicate sense which Miss Aubrey
manifested, of the peculiarly trying position in which she stood with
relation to them. Kate's own notion upon the subject was somewhat
indefinite; she having resolved not to listen to any proposal for a
union with Delamere, until her unfortunate brother's affairs had assumed
a more cheering and satisfactory aspect; and that might not be for some
years to come. If she replied to the letter from Delamere, enclosed by
Lady De la Zouch--and reply she must, to acknowledge his brilliant
present--it would be the first letter she had ever written to him, which
will account, in a measure, for her exquisite embarrassment. And
although all of them kept up a correspondence with Lord and Lady De la
Zouch, they never, from obvious considerations of honorable delicacy and
pride, gave the slightest intimation of the dreadful pressure which they
were beginning daily to experience. Lord De la Zouch remained under the
impression that Mr. Aubrey was struggling, it might be slowly, but still
successfully, with his difficulties; and had made up his mind, when
called upon, to pay, almost as a matter of course, the amount of the
bond into which he had entered in Aubrey's behalf. As Aubrey desired
evidently to maintain a reserve upon the subject of his private affairs,
Lord De la Zouch, whatever might be his fears and suspicions, forbore to
press his inquiries. How little, therefore, were either Lord and Lady De
la Zouch, or their son, aware of the position in which their packet
would find the Aubreys!

Within a few days, Mr. Runnington, by duly completing special bail in
the two actions of _Quirk and Others_ v. _Aubrey_, and _Titmouse_ v.
_Aubrey_, had relieved Mr. Aubrey from all grounds of immediate personal
apprehension for several months to come--in fact, for at least half a
year; and on quitting Vivian Street, one evening, after announcing this
satisfactory result of his labors, he slipped into Mr. Aubrey's hand, as
he took leave of him at the door, a letter, which he desired Mr. Aubrey
to read, and if he thought it worth while, to answer--at his leisure.
Guess the emotions of lively gratitude with which he perused the
following:--

                                                      "_Lincoln's Inn._

     "MY DEAR SIR,--You have once or twice, lately, been so kind as to
     express yourself obliged by the little professional services which
     I have recently rendered you in the ordinary course of practice.
     Permit me, in my turn, then, to ask a great favor of you; and,
     knowing your refined and exquisite sensibility, I make the request
     with some little apprehension, lest I should in any way wound it. I
     earnestly beg that you will accept a trifling loan of three hundred
     pounds, to be repaid as soon as you may be enabled to do so with
     perfect convenience to yourself. If, unhappily for _yourself_, that
     time should never arrive, believe me, you will not occasion me the
     slightest imaginable inconvenience; for a long and successful
     practice has made me, many years since, independent of my
     profession, and of the world; as will, I am confident, be the case
     with you, should Providence spare your life. I happen to have been
     aware that, but for recent occurrences, it was your intention,
     about this time, to have commenced a second year's study, with
     either Mr. Crystal, or Mr. Mansfield the conveyancer. You will
     now, I trust, carry your intention into effect, without delay. I
     should venture to suggest, that at this period of the year, when
     the gentlemen of the common-law bar quit town for the circuit, (as
     will be the case within a few weeks with Mr. Crystal,) it would
     hardly answer your purpose to enter the chambers of a gentleman in
     that department; but that, as _conveyancers_ remain very much
     longer in town, you will find it answer your purpose immediately to
     enter the chambers of Mr. Mansfield, and reoccupy your mind with
     those invigorating and invaluable studies in which you have already
     made, as I hear, so great a progress; and which will serve to
     divert your thoughts from those wretched objects on which otherwise
     they will be too apt to dwell.

     "You will find that I have this day paid in to your credit, at your
     bankers, the sum of £300. And believe me to remain, my dear
     sir--Ever your most sincere and faithful friend,

                                                         "C. RUNNINGTON.

     "P. S.--Do not give yourself one moment's concern about the expense
     of the recent proceedings, which is, I assure you, very trifling."

Mr. Aubrey read this letter with heartfelt gratitude; and permitted no
morbid fastidiousness to interfere with his determination to avail
himself of the generous and opportune assistance of Mr. Runnington;
resolving, moreover, to profit by his very judicious suggestions as to
the course of his study, and to commence, as soon as possible, his
attendance at the chambers of Mr. Mansfield. Thus suddenly relieved, for
a considerable and a definite interval, from the tremendous pressure to
which he had been latterly subject, he, and indeed Mrs. Aubrey and Kate,
experienced great buoyancy and exhilaration of spirits.

Could, however, their sense of tranquillity and security be otherwise
than short-lived? What sort of a prospect was that before them?
Terrifying and hopeless indeed. As daily melted away the precious
interval between the present time and the dreadful month of
November--midst whose gloomy haze was visible to his shuddering eyes the
dismal porch of a prison, where he must be either immured for his life,
or its greater portion, or avail himself of the bitter ignominious
immunity afforded by the insolvent laws--the hearts of all of them sank
to their former depth of oppression. Still, resolved to work while it
was day, he addressed himself to his studies with redoubled energy, and
of course made proportionate advances. But all this suffering--all this
exertion, mental and physical--began to leave visible traces in his worn
and emaciated appearance; and I grieve to add, that the same cause not a
little impaired the beauty and injured the spirits of the devoted and
incomparable women whom Heaven had given to him, like angels, for his
companions.

Such being the footing upon which matters stood between Mr. Delamere and
Kate Aubrey, what chance had Mr. Gammon of obtaining the bright object
upon which he had set his dark and baleful eye, and to secure which he
was racking his brain, and devising such intricate schemes of deliberate
and cruel villany? As well might he have sighed after the planet
Venus--sweet star of eve!--as sought to grasp Kate Aubrey within his
arms!--Yet full before his mind's eye stood ever her image--though one
would have thought that there was sufficient in his own circumstances to
occupy every spare thought and feeling. Suppose the action for the
bribery penalties should go against him, and he should be at once fixed
with a liability for some five thousand pounds, including debt and
costs? And more than that sum he had recently lost in a speculation in
foreign stock, besides standing in a very precarious position with
respect to certain of the many speculations in which he had launched
both himself and others. Under these circumstances, it became hourly of
greater importance to him to secure the annuity of £2,000 on the Yatton
property, which he had with such difficulty extorted from Titmouse. He
resolved, moreover, to try the experiment of raising money on the bond
of Lord De la Zouch; and it also occurred to him, as possible, that even
if he should fail in the main object which he had proposed to himself,
in his artful and oppressive proceedings against Aubrey, yet they might
be the means of bringing forward friends to extricate him from his
difficulties, by discharging the sums for which he was liable. It was,
therefore, not till he had set into train the various matters which have
been laid before the reader, that he set off on a hurried visit to
Yorkshire, in order to ascertain the state of Lady Stratton's affairs;
to make arrangements for collecting the evidence against the impending
trials for bribery; and carry into effect some preliminary measures for
augmenting the whole of the Yatton rent-roll, by nearly £2,000 a-year.
His first interview with Mr. Parkinson apprised him distinctly of the
exceedingly precarious nature of the alleged intestacy of Lady Stratton.
Good Mr. Parkinson was no match for Mr. Gammon, but would have been much
more nearly so if he could have done but one thing--_held his tongue_:
but he was a good-natured, easy-tempered chatterer, and Gammon always
extracted from him, in a few moments, whatever he knew upon any subject.
'T was thus that he succeeded in obtaining conclusive evidence of the
intestacy; for Gammon discovered that the unexecuted draft of the
intended will had never been seen by Lady Stratton, or read over to her;
but had been drawn up by Mr. Parkinson himself, a day or two after
receiving her Ladyship's instructions;--that those instructions,
moreover, had been merely oral.

"It is one of the most melancholy cases I ever met with!" exclaimed
Gammon, with a sigh. "I suppose the reverses of the Aubrey family
frequently formed a subject of her Ladyship's conversation?"

"Oh, she has talked with me for hours together--and even very shortly
before her last illness!"

"It is, methinks, enough to raise the poor old lady from her grave, to
find so much of her property diverted thus to one who does not want it,
and who was a total stranger!"

"Ay, it is indeed!"

"I am a little surprised, to tell you the truth, that, under the
circumstances, her Ladyship should not have thought of at least
_sharing_ the policy between Miss Aubrey and Mr."----

"I do assure you that that is the very thing I have heard her several
times talking about lately!"

"That will do," thought his wily companion; "thank God she's clearly
_intestate_, then, for Parkinson's draft does not contain her _last_
will and testament--that will do--thank you, my honest friend!" This was
what was passing through Gammon's mind, while a sympathizing expression
was upon his face, and he shook his head, and deplored the untoward
event which had happened, in very pathetic terms indeed. On quitting Mr.
Parkinson, Gammon thus pursued the train of his thoughts:--

"What if I should allow this paper to be admitted to probate? Let me
see--It will give Miss Aubrey some fifteen thousand pounds:--or one
might take out administration in favor of Titmouse, and then suggest to
her that I had the means of nullifying the proceedings, and carrying
into effect Lady Stratton's intentions--for the Letters may be
_repealed_ at any time.--Stay, however. It is by no means impossible,
that when Parkinson comes to communicate with Aubrey, or that deep old
fellow Runnington, they may think of lodging a _caveat_ against our
letters of administration: but they'll fail--for Parkinson must speak
conclusively on _that_ point. So, perhaps, the better way will be, to
take out administration in the usual way, and see what _they_ will
do.--Then, there's Aubrey's bond--poor devil!--is it not unfortunate
for him?--But that shall be reserved; let us see the effect of our other
movements, first."

When Mr. Gammon returned to Yatton from the late Lady Stratton's
residence, he found several letters awaiting his arrival. One was from
Mr. Quirk--poor muddle-headed old soul!--all went wrong with him, the
moment that he missed Gammon from beside him. He wrote letters every
day, which were a faithful type of the confusion prevailing in his
thoughts; for though he was "up to" the ordinary criminal business of
the office, in which he had had some forty years' experience, their
_general_ business had latterly become so extended, and, to Quirk,
complicated, that his head, as it were, spun round from morning to
night, and all he could do was to put himself, and everybody about him,
into a bustle and fever. So he told Gammon, in his last letter, that
everything was going wrong, and would do so till "good friend Gammon
returned:" and, moreover, the old gentleman complained that Snap was
getting very careless and irregular in his attendance--and, in fact,
he--Quirk--had something very particular to say to Gammon, when they
met, about the aforesaid Snap!---About this the reader shall hear in
due time. Then came a letter from the Earl of Dreddlington, marked
"_private and confidential_" containing a most important communication,
to the effect that his Lordship had that day granted an audience to a
scientific gentleman of great eminence, and particularly well skilled in
geology; and he had satisfied the earl of a fact which the aforesaid
scientific gentleman told his Lordship he had discovered after a very
close geological survey of the superficial strata of the Isle of
Dogs--viz. that at a very little depth from the surface, there ran, in
parallel strata, rich beds of copper, lead, and coal, alternately, such
as could not possibly fail of making a quick and enormous return. His
Lordship, therefore, suggested the immediate formation of a company to
purchase the Isle of Dogs, and work the mines!--and "begged to be
favored with" Mr. Gammon's views on this subject, by return of post. In
a postscript, his Lordship informed Gammon, that he had just parted with
all his Golden Egg shares, at a considerable profit; and that the
Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company's shares were rising daily, on account
of the increasing probability of a universal war. Gammon did not think
it worth while to send any answer to the communication of his senior
partner; but wrote off a very polite and confidential letter to the
earl, begging his Lordship would do him the honor of taking no steps in
the matter till Mr. Gammon could wait upon his Lordship in town. _This_
matter over, Gammon wrote off another to the secretary of the VULTURE
INSURANCE COMPANY, giving them notice of the death of Lady Stratton, who
was insured in their office in a policy to the amount of £15,000, to
which, her Ladyship having died intestate, the writer's client,
Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq., M.P. for Yatton, had become entitled as
administrator--being her Ladyship's nearest next of kin:--that he
intended to take out letters of administration forthwith; and formal
evidence would be furnished to the Company, in due time, of the
completion of his legal title to the policy.

But here--I am concerned to say--the skittish, frolicsome, and malicious
jade, Fortune, after petting and fondling Titmouse, and overwhelming him
with her favors, suddenly turned round and hit him a severe slap in the
face, without the least provocation on his part, or rhyme or reason on
hers. And it happened in this wise. DAPPER SMUG, Esq., the secretary of
the Vulture, wrote by return of post, saying that he had laid Mr.
Gammon's letter before the directors; and that as soon as he should have
learned their pleasure on the subject, he would write to Mr. Gammon
again. And so he did--but only to request that gentleman to communicate
with Messrs. Screw and Son, the Company's solicitors. This Mr. Gammon
did, and in due time received a letter to the astounding purport and
effect following--that is to say, that they had carefully considered the
case, and regretted sincerely that they could not feel it their duty to
recommend the directors to pay the policy!! The directors had a duty,
sometimes--they would have it appear--a very painful one, to perform to
the public; and in short--in plain English, they intended to _resist the
claim altogether_! Gammon wrote in astonishment to know the grounds of
their refusal; and at length discovered that that truly respectable
Company considered themselves in possession of decisive evidence to show
that the policy had been vitiated through the concealment, or rather the
_non-communication_, of a material fact on the part of the late Lady
Stratton--possibly unintentionally--viz. that she was, at the time of
executing the policy, _subject to the_ GOUT. Gammon made anxious
inquiries of the servants, of Dr. Goddart, Mr. Parkinson, and of others,
who expressed infinite astonishment, declaring that she had never once
exhibited the slightest symptoms of the complaint. Messrs. Screw,
however, were politely inflexible--they declared that they had the
positive testimony of several witnesses, one of them an eminent
physician, to the fact that, during the very week in which the policy
had been executed, she had experienced an attack of gout which had
confined her to the sofa for three days. [The simple fact was, that her
Ladyship had about that time certainly been confined to the sofa, but
merely from her heel having been galled a little by a tight shoe.] They,
moreover, sent to Mr. Gammon the full name of the officer in whose name
the Company was to be sued--the aforesaid Dapper Smug; and requested Mr.
Gammon to forward process to them in the usual way. Gammon, on inquiry,
learned the character of the Company, and almost gnashed his teeth in
rage and despair!--So at it they went--TITMOUSE (_Administrator_) v.
SMUG. Then came a _Declaration_ as long as my arm; _Pleas_ to match it;
then a _Commission_ to examine witnesses abroad, principally a Dr.
Podagra, who had settled in China; then a _Bill of Discovery_ filed on
behalf of the Company; a _Cross Bill_ filed by Mr. Titmouse against the
Company; a _Demurrer_ to the one, _Exceptions_ to the Answer, to the
other.--Here, in short, was in truth "a very pretty quarrel." The stake
was adequate; the Company rich; Mr. Titmouse eager; Gammon infuriate;
and there was not the least chance of the thing being decided at all for
three or four years to come; and poor Titmouse was thus not only kept
out of a comfortable round sum of money, but obliged to carry on, all
the while, an expensive and harassing litigation. So much for insuring
with a Company which looks so sharply after the interests of _its
shareholders_, in preference to those of the survivors of the dead
insurers!--But as far as Titmouse and Gammon were concerned, it seemed a
_dead lock_, and at a somewhat critical conjuncture too.




CHAPTER VII.


The sudden and unexpected rebuff encountered by Mr. Gammon, in the
Vulture Insurance Company's refusal to pay the policy on the late Lady
Stratton's life, was calculated seriously to embarrass his complicated
movements. He foresaw the protracted and harassing course of litigation
into which he should be driven, before he could compel them to liquidate
so heavy a claim; and a glimpse of which, by way of anticipation, has
been afforded to the reader; but, with all his long-headedness--his
habitual contemplation of the probable and possible effects and
consequences of whatever event happened to him--this refusal of the
directors to pay the policy was attended with results which defied his
calculations--results of such a description, and of such signal
importance, as will perhaps surprise the reader, and serve to
illustrate, in a striking manner, the controlling agency which is at
work in the conduct of human affairs--an agency to which the principles
of Mr. Gammon denied an existence. Nor was this the only trouble--the
only reverse--which about this period occurred to him; and not a little
perplexed was he to account for such a sudden confluence of adverse
circumstances as he by-and-by experienced, when he found the truth of
the King of Denmark's observation,--

    "When sorrows come--they come not single spies,
    But IN BATTALIONS."[12]

On applying at Doctor's Commons, in the ordinary way, for a grant, to
Mr. Titmouse, of Letters of Administration to Lady Stratton, Mr. Gammon
discovered the existence of a little document, for which he certainly
was not entirely unprepared, but which, nevertheless, somewhat
disconcerted him: principally on account of the additional plea it would
afford the Vulture Company for resisting payment of the policy. How,
indeed, could they be expected to pay a sum of such magnitude, to a
person whose title to receive it was disputed by another claimant? The
document alluded to was a CAVEAT, and ran thus:--

     "Let nothing be done in the goods of Dame Mary Stratton,
     late of Warkleigh, in the parish of Warkleigh, in the county of
     York, deceased, unknown to Obadiah Pounce, proctor for _John
     Thomas_, having interest."

Now, the reader will observe that this "_John Thomas_" is, like the
"_John Doe_" of the common lawyers, a mere man of straw; so that this
peremptory, but mysterious mandate, would afford an inquirer no
information as to either the name of the party intending to resist the
grant of administration, or the grounds of such resistance. Mr. Gammon,
however, very naturally concluded that the move was made on the behalf
of Mr. Aubrey, and that the ground of his opposition was the alleged
will of Lady Stratton. To be prepared for such an encounter when the
time arrived, he had noted down, very carefully, the important
admissions which had been made to him by Mr. Parkinson; and having, for
a while, disposed of this affair, he betook himself to the great
conspiracy case which I have already mentioned; and, in bringing which
to a successful issue, he unquestionably exhibited great ability, and
deserved the compliments paid him on the occasion by the counsel, whose
labors he had, by his lucid arrangement, materially abbreviated and
lightened. This matter also over, and fairly off his mind, he addressed
himself to an affair, then pending, of great importance to himself
personally--viz. a certain cause of _Wigley_ v. _Gammon_; which,
together with the three other special jury causes in which the same
person was plaintiff, was to come on for trial at York early in the
second week of the assizes, which were to commence within a few days'
time. As already intimated, Mr. Subtle had been retained for the
plaintiff in all the actions, together with Mr. Sterling and Mr.
Crystal; and, as Mr. Quicksilver had become Lord Blossom and Box, Mr.
Gammon was sorely perplexed for a leader--his junior, of course, being
Mr. Lynx. He had retained a Mr. Wilmington to lead for the other three
defendants--a man of undoubted ability, experienced, acute, dexterous,
witty, and eloquent, and exceedingly well qualified to conduct such a
case as Mr. Gammon's: but that gentleman got exceedingly nervous about
the matter as the day of battle drew near--and, at length, resolved on
taking down special Sir Charles Wolstenholme. Now, I do not see why he
should have thought it necessary to go to so enormous an expense when
such able assistance could have been had upon the circuit--but, however,
down went that eminent personage. Their consultation was gloomy; Sir
Charles acknowledging that he felt great apprehension as to the result,
from the witnesses who were likely to be produced on the other side.

"It's a pity that we haven't the Yatton election committee to deal with,
Mr. Gammon!" said Sir Charles, with a sly sarcastic smile. "We've rather
a different tribunal to go before now--eh?"

Mr. Gammon smiled--how miserably!--shook his head, and shrugged his
shoulders. "We manage these matters rather differently in a court of
law!" continued Sir Charles, with a fearful significance!

When the important morning of the trial arrived, there was a special
jury sworn, consisting of gentlemen of the county--of integrity and
independence--above all suspicion. Mr. Subtle opened a shockingly clear
and strong case, to be sure; and what was worse, he _proved_ it, and so
as to carry conviction to the minds of all in court. Sir Charles felt
his opponent's case to be impregnable; and, in spite of several acute
and severe cross-examinations, and a masterly speech, the stern and
upright judge who tried the cause, summed up dead against the defendant,
with many grave remarks on the profligate and systematic manner in which
it appeared that the offences had been committed. After a brief
consultation, the jury returned into court with a verdict for the
plaintiff, in the sum of £2,500; that is, for five penalties of
£500![13] A similar result ensued in each of the two following cases of
_Wigley_ v. _Mudflint_, and _Wigley_ v. _Bloodsuck_; both of whom seemed
completely stupefied at an issue so totally different from that which
they had been led to expect, by the very different view of things which
had been taken by the election committee. As for Mudflint, from what
quarter under heaven he was to get the means of satisfying that truly
diabolical verdict, he could not conjecture; and his face became several
shades sallower as soon as he had heard his doom pronounced; but
Bloodsuck, who had turned quite white, whispered in his ear, that _of
course_ Mr. Titmouse would see them harmless----

"Oh Lord!" however, muttered Mudflint, in a cold perspiration--"I should
like to hear Mr. Gammon recommending him to do so, _under
circumstances_!"

Poor Woodlouse was more fortunate--somehow or another he contrived to
creep and wriggle out of the danger! Whether from his utter
insignificance, or from the circumstance of the destructive verdicts
against Gammon, Mudflint, and Bloodsuck having satiated the avenger, I
know not; but the case was not pressed very strongly against him, and
the jury took a most merciful view of the evidence. But alas! what a
shock this gave to the Liberal cause in Yatton! How were the mighty
fallen! As soon after this melancholy result as Messrs. Mudflint and
Bloodsuck had recovered their presence of mind sufficiently to discuss
the matter together, they were clearly of opinion--were those brethren
in distress--that Mr. Titmouse was bound, both in law and honor, to
indemnify them against the consequences of acts done solely on his
behalf, and at his implied request. They made the thing very clear,
indeed, to Mr. Gammon, who listened to them with marked interest and
attention, and undertook "to endeavor to convince" Mr. Titmouse of the
justice of their claims; secretly resolving, also, not to lose sight of
his own: nay, in fact, he made sure of satisfying Mr. Titmouse on _that_
score. But the personal liability which, in the first instance, he had
thus incurred, to an extent of upwards of £3,000, supposing him, by any
accident, to fail in _recouping_ himself out of the assets of Mr.
Titmouse, was not the only unfortunate consequence of this serious
miscarriage. Such a verdict as had passed against Mr. Gammon places a
man in a very awkward and--if one may use the word--_nasty_ position
before the public, and renders it rather difficult for him to set
himself right again. 'T is really a serious thing to stand convicted of
the offence of bribery; it makes a man look very sheepish indeed, ever
after, especially in political life. 'T is such a beam in a man's own
eye, to be pulled out before he can see the mote in his neighbor's!--and
Mr. Gammon felt this. Then again, he had received a pledge from a very
eminent member of the government, to be performed in the event of his
being able to secure the seat for Yatton on a general election, (which
was considered not unlikely to happen within a few months;) but this
accursed verdict was likely to prove an insurmountable obstacle in the
way of his advancement; and his chagrin and vexation may be easily
imagined. He conceived a wonderful hatred of the supposed instigator of
these unprincipled and vindictive proceedings, Lord De la Zouch--who
seemed to have put them up like four birds to be shot at, and brought
down, one by one, as his Lordship chose! As soon as these four
melancholy causes above mentioned were over--Gammon considering himself
bound, on the score of bare decency, to remain till his fellow-sufferers
had been disposed of--he went off to Yatton, to see how matters were
going on there.

Alas! what a state of things existed there! Good old Yatton, and all
about it, seemed wofully changed for the worse, since the departure of
the excellent Aubreys and the accession of Mr. Titmouse. The local
superintendence of his interests had been intrusted by Gammon to the
Messrs. Bloodsuck; who had found their business, in consequence, so much
increasing, as to require the establishment of Mr. Barnabas Bloodsuck at
Yatton, while his father remained at Grilston; their partnership,
however, continuing. He had, accordingly, run up a thin slip of a place
at the end of the village farthest from the park gates, and within a few
yards of the house in which old Blind Bess had ended her days. He was
the first attorney that had ever lived in Yatton. There was a
particularly impudent and priggish air about his residence. The door was
painted a staring mahogany color, and bore a bright brass plate, with
the words--"MESSRS. BLOODSUCK & SON, ATTORNEYS AND SOLICITORS"--words
which shot terror into the heart of many a passer-by, especially the
tenants of Mr. Titmouse. At the moment, for instance, of Mr. Gammon's
arrival at Yatton, on the present occasion, actions for rent, and other
matters, were actually pending against _fourteen_ of the poorer
tenants!! 'T was all up with them, as soon as the Messrs. Bloodsuck were
fairly fastened upon them. Let them be a day or two in arrear with their
rent, a _cognovit_, or _warrant of attorney_--for the sake of the costs
it produced--was instantly proposed; and, if the expensive security
were demurred to by the poor souls, by that night's post went up
instructions to town for writs to be sent down by return! If some of the
more resolute questioned the propriety of a distress made upon them with
cruel precipitancy, they found themselves immediately involved in a
replevin suit, from whose expensive intricacies they were at length glad
to escape, terrified, on any terms. Then actions of trespass, and so
forth, were commenced upon the most frivolous pretexts. Old and
convenient rights of way were suddenly disputed, and made the subjects
of expensive lawsuits. Many of the former quiet inhabitants of the
village had been forced out of it, their places being supplied by
persons of a very different description; and a bad state of feeling,
chiefly arising out of political rancor, had, for instance, just given
rise to three actions--two of _assault_ and one of _slander_--from that
once peaceful little village, and which had been tried at those very
assizes! Poor Miss Aubrey's village school, alas! had been
transmogrified into a chapel for Mr. Mudflint, where he rallied round
him every Sunday an excited throng of ignorant and disaffected people,
and regaled them with seditious and blasphemous harangues. 'T would have
made your hair stand on end to hear the language in which he spoke of
the sacred mysteries of the Christian religion--it would have filled you
with disgust and indignation to hear his attacks upon the Church of
England and its ministers, and in particular upon dear little exemplary
unoffending old Dr. Tatham, whom he described as "battening upon cant,
hypocrisy, and extortion." Strange and melancholy to relate, this novel
mode of procedure on the part of Mr. Mudflint for a while succeeded. In
vain did the white-haired and learned vicar preach his very best
sermons, and in his very best manner--he beheld his church thinning,
while the chapel of Mr. Mudflint was filled. And, as he went about the
village in the zealous, and vigilant, and affectionate discharge of his
pastoral duties, he perceived symptoms, now and then, of a grievously
altered manner towards him, on the part of those who had once hailed his
approach and his ministrations with a kind of joyful reverence and
cordiality. Mudflint had also, in furtherance of his purpose of bitter
hostility, in concert with his worthy coadjutors the Bloodsucks, stirred
up two or three persons in the parish to resist the doctor's claim to
tithe, and to offer harassing obstructions to the collecting of it. In
justice to the Church, and to his successors, he could not permit his
rights to be thus questioned and denied with impunity--and thus, to his
sore grief, the worthy old vicar found himself, for the first time in
his life, involved in a couple of lawsuits, which he feared, even if he
won them, would ruin him. It may be imagined that Mudflint's
discomfiture at the assizes was calculated to send him, like a scotched
snake, writhing, hissing, and snapping, through the village, at all that
came in his way. It is possible that Mr. Gammon was not so fully
apprised of all these doings, as is now the reader; yet he saw and heard
enough to lead him to suspect that things were going a little too far.
He took, however, no steps towards effecting an abatement or
discontinuance of them. Just at present, moreover, he was peculiarly
reluctant to interfere with any of the proceedings of the Messrs.
Bloodsuck, and confined himself to receiving their report as to some
arrangements which he had desired them to carry into effect. In the
first place, he did not disclose the existence of his heavy and newly
created rent-charge, but gave them to understand that Mr. Titmouse's
circumstances were such as to make it requisite to extract as much from
the property as could possibly be obtained, by raising the rents--by
effecting a further mortgage upon the property, and by a sale of all the
timber that was fit for felling. It was found necessary to look out for
new tenants to one or two of the largest farms on the estate, as the old
tenants declared themselves unable to sustain the exorbitant rents which
they were called upon to pay; so orders were given to advertise for
tenants, in the county, and other newspapers. Then Mr. Gammon went all
over the estate, to view the condition of the timber, attended by the
sullen and reluctant wood-bailiff, who, though he retained his
situation, mortally hated his new master, and all connected with him.
Very little timber was, according to _his_ account, fit for felling!
Having looked into these various matters, Mr. Gammon took his departure
for town, glad to escape, though for never so brief an interval, the
importunities of Messrs. Mudflint and Bloodsuck, on the subject of the
late verdicts against them, and which he pledged himself to represent in
a proper way to Mr. Titmouse. On arriving in town, he lost no time in
waiting upon the great man to whom he looked for the political
advancement after which his soul pined. He was received with manifest
coolness, evidently occasioned by the position in which he had been
placed by the verdict in the action for the bribery penalties. What the
great man objected to, be it understood, was not Mr. Gammon's having
bribed, but having done it in such a way as to admit of detection! On
solemnly assuring his patron, however, that the verdict was entirely
against evidence, and that Sir Charles Wolstenholme was, in the next
term, going to move for a rule to set aside the verdict on that ground,
and also on several other grounds, and that, by such means, the cause
could be, at the very least, "hung up" for heaven only knew how long to
come--till, in short, people had forgotten all about it--the clouds
slowly disappeared from the great man's brow, especially on his being
assured that Gammon's return for Yatton, on the next vacancy, was a
matter of absolute certainty. Then he gave Mr. Gammon certain
assurances which flushed his cheek with delight and triumph--delight and
triumph inspired by a conviction that his deeply-laid schemes, his
comprehensive plans, were, despite a few minor and temporary checks and
reverses, being crowned with success. It was true that his advances
towards Miss Aubrey appeared to have been hopelessly repelled; but he
resolved to wait till the time should have arrived for bringing other
reserved forces into the field--by the aid of which he yet hoped to make
an equally unexpected and decisive demonstration.

The more immediate object of his anxieties, was to conceal as far as
possible his connection with the various joint-stock speculations, into
which he had entered with a wild and feverish eagerness to realize a
rapid fortune. He had already withdrawn from one or two with which he
had been only for a brief time, and secretly, connected--not, however,
until he had realized no inconsiderable sum by his judicious but
somewhat unscrupulous operations. He was also anxious, if practicable,
to extricate Lord Dreddlington, at the proper conjuncture, with as
little damage as possible to his Lordship's fortune or character: for
his Lordship's countenance and good offices were becoming of greater
consequence to Mr. Gammon than ever. It was true that he possessed
information--I mean that concerning Titmouse's birth and true
position--which he considered would, whenever he thought fit to avail
himself of it, give him an absolute mastery over the unhappy peer for
the rest of his life; but he felt that it would be a critical and
dreadful experiment, and not to be attempted but in the very last
resort. He would sometimes gaze at the unconscious earl, and speculate
in a sort of revery upon the possible effects attending the dreaded
disclosure, till he would give a sort of inward start as he realized the
fearful and irretrievable extent to which he had committed himself. He
shuddered also to think that he was, moreover, in a measure, at the
mercy of Titmouse himself--who, in some mad moment of drunkenness or
desperation, or of pique or revenge, might disclose the fatal secret,
and precipitate upon him, when least prepared for them, all its
long-dreaded consequences. The slender faculties of Lord Dreddlington
had been for months in a state of novel and grateful excitement, through
the occupation afforded them by his connection with the fashionable
modes of commercial enterprise--joint-stock companies, the fortunate
members of which got rich they scarcely knew how. It seemed as though
certain persons had but to acquire a nominal interest in some great
transaction of this sort, to find it pouring wealth into their coffers,
as if by magic; and it was thus that Lord Dreddlington, among others,
found himself quietly realizing very considerable sums of money, without
apparent risk or exertion--his movements being skilfully guided by
Gammon, and one or two others, who, while they treated him as a mere
instrument to aid in effecting their own purposes in deluding the
public, yet contrived to impress him with the flattering notion that he
was, in a masterly manner, directing their course of procedure, and
richly entitled to their deference and gratitude. 'T was, indeed,
ecstasy to poor old Lord Dreddlington to behold his name, from time to
time, glittering in the van--himself figuring away as a chief patron--a
prime mover--in some vast and lucrative undertaking, which, almost from
the first moment of its projection, attracted the notice and confidence
of the moneyed classes, and became productive to its originators! Many
attempts were made by his brother peers, and those who once had
considerable influence over him, to open his eyes to the very
questionable nature of the concerns to which he was so freely lending
the sanction of his name and personal interference; but his pride and
obstinacy caused him to turn a deaf ear to their suggestions; and the
skilful and delicious flatteries of Mr. Gammon and others, seconded by
the substantial fruits of his fancied skill and energy, urged him on
from step to step, till he became one of the most active and constant in
his interference with the concerns of one or two great speculations,
such as have been mentioned in a former part of this history, and from
which he looked forward to realizing, at no very distant day, the most
resplendent results. Never, in fact, had one man obtained over another a
more complete mastery, than had Mr. Gammon over the Earl of
Dreddlington; at whose exclusive table he was a frequent guest, and
thereby obtained opportunities of acquiring the good-will of one or two
other persons of the earl's intellectual status and calibre.

His Lordship was sitting in his library (his table covered with letters
and papers) one morning, with a newspaper--the _Morning Growl_--lying in
his lap, and a certain portion of the aforesaid newspaper he had read
over several times with exquisite satisfaction. He had, late on the
preceding evening, returned from his seat in Hertfordshire, whither he
had been suddenly called on business, early in the morning; so that it
was not until the time at which he is now presented to the reader, that
his Lordship had had an opportunity of perusing what was now affording
him such gratification; viz. a brief, but highly flattering report of a
splendid whitebait dinner which had been given to him the day before at
Blackwall, by a party of some thirty gentlemen, who were, _inter nos_,
most adroit and successful traders upon that inexhaustible capital,
_public credulity_, as founders, managers, and directors, of various
popular joint-stock companies; and the progress of which, in public
estimation, had been materially accelerated by the countenance of so
distinguished a nobleman as the Right Hon. the Earl of Dreddlington, G.
C. B., &c. &c. &c.[14] When his Lordship's carriage--containing himself,
in evening dress, and wearing his red ribbon, and one or two foreign
orders, and also his son-in-law, the member for Yatton, who was dressed
in the highest style of fashionable elegance--drew up opposite the
doorway of the hotel, he was received, on alighting, by several of those
who had assembled to do him honor, in the same sort of flattering and
reverential manner which you may conceive would be exhibited by a party
of great East India directors, on the occasion of their giving a banquet
to a newly-appointed Governor-General of India! Covers had been laid for
thirty-five, and the entertainment was in all respects of the most
sumptuous description--every way worthy of the entertainers and their
distinguished guest. Not far from the earl sat Mr. Gammon. Methinks I
see now his gentlemanly figure--his dark-blue coat, white waistcoat, and
simple black stock--his calm smile, his keen watchful eye, his
well-developed forehead, suggesting to you a capability of the highest
kind of intellectual action. There was a subdued cheerfulness in his
manner, which was bland and fascinating as ever; and towards the great
man of the day, he exhibited such a marked air of deference as was,
indeed, to the object of it, most delicious and seductive. The earl soon
mounted into the seventh heaven of delight; he had never experienced
anything of this sort before; he felt GLORIFIED--for such qualities were
attributed to him in the after-dinner speeches, as even he had not
before imagined the existence of in himself; his ears were ravished with
the sound of his own praises. He was infinitely more intoxicated by the
magnificent compliments which he received, than by the very unusual, but
still not excessive, quantity of champagne which he had half
unconsciously taken during dinner; the combined effect of them being to
produce a state of delightful excitement which he had never known
before. Mr. Titmouse, M. P., also came in for his share of laudation,
and made--said the report in the _Morning Growl_--a brief but very
spirited speech, in return for the compliment of his health being
proposed. At length, it being time to think of returning to town, his
Lordship withdrew, Sir Sharper Bubble, (the chairman,) and others,
attending him bareheaded to his carriage, which, his Lordship and
Titmouse having entered, drove off amid the bows and courteous
inclinations of the gentlemen standing upon and around the steps.
Titmouse almost immediately fell asleep, overpowered by the prodigious
quantity of wine which he had swallowed; and thus left the earl, who was
himself in a much more buoyant humor than was usual with him, to revel
in the recollection of the homage which he had been receiving. Now, this
was the affair, of which a very flourishing though brief account
(privately paid for by the gentleman who sent it) appeared in the
_Morning Growl_, with a most magnificent speech of his Lordship's about
free trade, and the expansive principles of commercial enterprise, and
so forth: 't was true, that the earl had no recollection of having
either meditated the delivery of any such speech, or of having actually
delivered it--but he _might_ have done so for all that, and possibly
did. He read over the whole account several times, as I have already
said; and at the moment of his being presented to the reader, sitting in
his easy-chair, and with the newspaper in his lap, he was in a very
delightful state of feeling. He secretly owned to himself that he was
not entirely undeserving of the compliments which had been paid to him.
Considerably advanced though he was in life, he was consciously
developing energies commensurate with the exigencies which called for
their display--energies which had long lain dormant for want of such
opportunities. What practical tact and judgment he felt conscious of
exhibiting, while directing the experienced energies of mercantile men
and capitalists! How proud and delighted was he at the share he was
taking in steering the commercial enterprise of the country into proper
quarters, and to proper objects; and, moreover, while he was thus
benefiting his country, he was also sensibly augmenting his own private
revenue. In his place in the House of Lords, also, he displayed a
wonderful energy, and manifested surprising interest in all mercantile
questions started there. He was, consequently, nominated one of a
committee (into the appointment of which he and one or two others like
him had teased and worried their Lordships) to inquire into the best
mode of facilitating the formation, and extending the operations, of
Joint-Stock Companies; and asked at least four times as many questions
of the witnesses called before them, as any other member of the
committee. He also began to feel still loftier aspirations. His Lordship
was not without hopes that the declining health of Sir Miserable Muddle,
the president of the Board of Trade, would soon open a prospect for his
Lordship's accession to office, as the successor of that enlightened
statesman; feeling conscious that the mercantile part of the community
would look with great approbation upon so satisfactory an appointment,
and that thereby the king's government would be materially strengthened.
As for matter of a more directly business character, I may mention that
his Lordship was taking active measures towards organizing a company for
the purchase of the Isle of Dogs, and working the invaluable mines of
copper, lead, and coal which lay underneath. These and other matters
fully occupied his Lordship's attention, and kept him from morning to
night in a pleasurable state of excitement and activity. Still he had
his drawbacks. The inexorable premier continued to turn a deaf ear to
all his solicitations for a marquisate--till he began to entertain the
notion of transferring his support to the opposition; and, in fact, he
resolved upon doing so, if another session should have elapsed without
his receiving the legitimate reward of his steadfast adherence to the
Liberal cause. Then again he became more and more sensible that Lady
Cecilia was not happy in her union with Mr. Titmouse, and that his
conduct was not calculated to make her so; in fact, his Lordship began
to suspect that there was a total incompatibility of tempers and
dispositions, which would inevitably force on a separation--under
existing circumstances a painful step, and evidently unadvisable. His
Lordship's numerous inquiries of Mr. Gammon as to the state of Mr.
Titmouse's property, met occasionally with unsatisfactory, and (as any
one of clearer head than his Lordship would have seen) most inconsistent
answers. Mr. Titmouse's extravagant expenditure was a matter of
notoriety; the earl himself had been once or twice compelled to come
forward, in order to assist in relieving his son-in-law's house from
executions; and he repeatedly reasoned and remonstrated with Mr.
Titmouse on the impropriety of many parts of his conduct--Titmouse
generally acknowledging, with much appearance of compunction and
sincerity, that the earl had too much ground for complaint, and
protesting that he meant to change altogether one of these days. Indeed,
matters would soon have been brought to a crisis between the earl and
Titmouse, had not the former been so constantly immersed in business, as
to prevent his mind from dwelling upon the various instances of
Titmouse's misconduct which from time to time came under his notice. The
condition of Lady Cecilia was one which gave the earl anxiety and
interest. She was _enceinte_; and the prospect which this afforded the
earl, of the family honors continuing in a course of direct descent,
gave him unspeakable satisfaction. Thus is it, in short, that no one's
cup is destitute of some ingredients of bitterness or of happiness; that
the wheat and the tares--happiness and anxiety--grow up together. The
above will suffice to indicate the course taken by his Lordship's
thoughts on the present occasion. He sat back in his chair in a sort of
revery; having laid down his paper, and placed his gold spectacles on
the little stand beside him, where lay also his massive old gold
repeater. The _Morning Growl_ of that morning was very late, owing to
the arrival of foreign news; but it was brought in to his Lordship just
as he was beginning to open his letters. These his Lordship laid aside
for a moment, in order to skim over the contents of his paper; on which
he had not been long engaged, before his eye lit upon a paragraph which
gave him a dreadful shock, blanching his cheek, and throwing him into an
universal tremor. He read it over several times, almost doubting whether
he could be reading correctly. It is possible that the experienced
reader may not be taken as much by surprise as was the Earl of
Dreddlington; but the intelligence conveyed by the paragraph in question
was simply this--that the ARTIFICIAL RAIN COMPANY had, so to speak,
suddenly evaporated!--and that this result had been precipitated by the
astounding discovery in the City, in the preceding afternoon, that the
managing director of the Company had _bolted_ with all the available
funds of the society--and who should this be but the gentleman who had
presided so ably the evening but one before, over the Blackwall dinner
to his Lordship, viz. SIR SHARPER BUBBLE!!! The plain fact was, that
that worthy had at that very time completed all arrangements necessary
for taking the very decisive step on which he had determined; and within
an hour's time of handing the Earl of Dreddlington to his carriage, in
the way that has been described, had slipped into a boat moored by the
water side, and got safely on board a fine brig bound for America, just
as she was hauling up anchor, and spreading forth her canvas before a
strong steady west wind, which was at that moment bearing him, under the
name of Mr. Snooks, rapidly away from the artificial and unsatisfactory
state of things which prevailed in the Old World, to a new one, where he
hoped there would not exist such impediments in the way of extended
commercial enterprise. As soon as the earl had a little recovered from
the agitation into which this announcement had thrown him, he hastily
rang his bell, and ordered his carriage to be got instantly in
readiness. Having put the newspaper into his pocket, he was soon on his
way, at a great speed, towards the Poultry, in the City, where was the
office of the Company, with the faintest glimmer of a hope that there
might be some mistake about the matter. Ordering his servant to let him
out the instant that the carriage drew up, the earl, not allowing his
servant to anticipate him, got down and rang the bell, the outer door
being closed, although it was now twelve o'clock. The words "ARTIFICIAL
RAIN COMPANY" still shone in gilt letters half a foot long, on the green
blind of the window. But all was--still--deserted--dry as Gideon's
fleece! An old woman presently answered his summons. She said she
believed the business was given up; and there had been a good many
gentlemen inquiring about it--that he was welcome to go in--but there
was nobody in except her and a little child. With an air of
inconceivable agitation, his Lordship went into the lower offices. All
was silent; no clerks, no servants, no porters or messengers; no books,
or prospectuses, or writing materials. "I've just given everything a
good dusting, sir," said she to the earl, at the same wiping off a
little dust with the corner of her apron, which had escaped her. Then
the earl went up-stairs into the "Board Room." There, also, all was
silent and deserted, and very clean and in good order. _There_ was the
green baize-covered table, at which he had often sat, presiding over
the enlightened deliberations of the directors! The earl gazed in silent
stupor about him.

"They say it's a blow-up, sir," quoth the old woman. "But I should think
it's rather sudden! There's been several here has looked as much struck
as you, sir!" This recalled the earl to his senses, and, without
uttering a word, he descended the stairs. "Beg pardon, sir--but _could_
you tell me who I'm to look to for taking care of the place? I can't
find out the gentleman as sent for me"----

"My good woman," replied the earl, faintly, hastening from the horrid
scene, "I know nothing about it;" and, stepping into his carriage, he
ordered it to drive on to Lombard Street, to the late Company's bankers.
As soon as he had, with a little indistinctness arising from his
agitation, mentioned the words "Artificial Rain"----

"Account closed!" was the brief matter-of-fact answer, given in a
business-like and peremptory tone, the speaker immediately attending to
some one else. The earl was too much flustered to observe a knowing wink
interchanged among the clerks behind, as soon as they had caught the
words "Artificial Rain Company!"--The earl, with increasing trepidation,
re-entered his carriage, and ordered it to be driven to the office of
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. There he arrived in a trice; but, being
informed that Mr. Gammon had not yet come, and would probably be found
at his chambers in Thavies' Inn, the horses' heads were forthwith
turned, and within a few minutes' time the carriage had drawn up
opposite to the entrance to Thavies' Inn--where the earl had never been
before. Without sending his servant on beforehand to inquire, his
Lordship immediately alighted, and soon found out the staircase where
were Mr. Gammon's private apartments, on the first floor. The words "MR.
GAMMON" were painted in white letters over the door, the outer one being
open. His Lordship's rather hasty summons was answered by Mr. Gammon's
laundress, a tidy middle-aged woman, who lived in the chambers, and
informed the earl, that if he wished to see Mr. Gammon, he had better
step in and wait for a minute or two--as Mr. Gammon had only just gone
to the stationer's, a little way off, and said he should be back in a
minute or two. In went the earl and sat down in Mr. Gammon's
sitting-room. It was a fair-sized room, neatly furnished, more for use
than show. A plain deal bookcase, stretching over the whole of one side
of the apartment, was filled with books, and beside it, and opposite to
the fireplace, was the door of Mr. Gammon's bedroom--which, being open,
appeared as though it had not been yet set to rights since Mr. Gammon
had slept in it. He had not, in fact, risen as early as usual that
morning. The earl sat down, having removed his hat; and in placing it
upon the table, his eye lit upon an object, which suggested to him a new
source of amazement and alarm. It was a freshly executed parchment
conveyance, folded up in the usual way, about a foot square in size; and
as the earl sat down, his eye could scarcely fail to read the
superscription, in large round hand, which was turned full towards him,
and, in short, ran thus:--

         TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, Esq.,  }  Grant of RENT-CHARGE on
                  to                }  Estates at Yatton, of £2,000
           Oily Gammon, _Gent._     }  _per annum_.

This almost stopped the earl's breath. With trembling hands he put on
his spectacles, to assure himself that he read correctly; and with a
face overspread with dismay--almost unconscious of what he was
doing--was gazing intensely at the writing, holding the parchment in his
hands; and while thus absorbed, Mr. Gammon entered, having darted across
the inn, and sprung up-stairs with lightning speed, the instant that
his eye had caught Lord Dreddlington's equipage standing opposite to the
inn. He had instantly recollected having left on the table the deed in
question, which had been executed by Titmouse only the evening before;
and little anticipated that, of all persons upon earth, Lord
Dreddlington would be the first whose eye would light upon it. 'T was,
perhaps, somewhat indiscreet to leave it there; but it was in Gammon's
own private residence--where he had very few visitors, especially at
that time of the day--and he had intended only a momentary absence,
having gone out on the impulse of a sudden suggestion. See the result!

"My Lord Dreddlington!" exclaimed Gammon, breathless with haste and
agitation, the instant he saw his worst apprehensions fulfilled. The
earl looked up at him, as it were mechanically, over his glasses,
without moving, or attempting to speak.

"I--I--beg your Lordship's pardon!" he added quickly and sternly,
advancing towards Lord Dreddlington. "Pardon me, but surely your
Lordship cannot be aware of the liberty you are taking--in looking at my
private papers!"--and with an eager and not over-ceremonious hand, he
took the conveyance out of the unresisting grasp of his noble visitor.

"Sir--Mr. Gammon!"--at length exclaimed the earl, in a faltering
voice--"what is the meaning of that?" pointing with a tremulous finger
to the conveyance which Mr. Gammon held in his hand.

"_What is it?_ A private--a strictly private document of mine, my
Lord"--replied Gammon, with breathless impetuosity, his eye flashing
fury, and his face having become deadly pale--"one with which your
Lordship has no more concern than your footman--one which I surely might
have fancied safe from intrusive eyes in _my own_ _private
residence_--one which I am confounded--yes, confounded! my Lord, at
finding that you could for an instant allow yourself--consider yourself
warranted in even looking at--prying into--and much less presuming to
ask questions concerning it!" He held the parchment all this while
tightly grasped in his hands; his appearance and manner might have
overpowered a man of stronger nerves than the Earl of Dreddlington. On
him, however, it appeared to produce no impression--his faculties
seeming quite absorbed with the discovery he had just made, and he
simply inquired, without moving from his chair--

"Is it a fact, sir, that you have a rent-charge of two thousand a-year
upon my son-in-law's property at Yatton?"

"I deny peremptorily your Lordship's right to ask me a single question
arising out of information obtained in such a dis--I mean such an
unprecedented manner!" answered Gammon, vehemently.

"Two thousand a-year, sir!--out of my son-in-law's property?" repeated
the earl, with a kind of bewildered incredulity.

"I cannot comprehend your Lordship's conduct in attempting neither to
justify what you have done, nor apologize for it," said Gammon,
endeavoring to speak calmly; and at the same time depositing the
conveyance in a large iron safe, and then locking the door of it, Lord
Dreddlington, the while, eying his movements in silence.

"Mr. Gammon, I must and will have this matter explained; depend upon it,
I will have it looked into and thoroughly sifted," at length said Lord
Dreddlington, with returning self-possession, as Gammon observed--

"Can your Lordship derive any right to information from me, out of an
act of your Lordship's which no honorable mind--nay, if your Lordship
insists on my making myself understood--I will say, an act which no
gentleman would resort to"----The earl rose from his chair with
calmness and dignity.

"What _your_ notions of honorable or gentlemanly conduct may happen to
be, sir," said the old peer, drawing himself up to his full height, and
speaking with his usual deliberation, "it may not be worth my while to
inquire; but let me tell you, sir"----

"My Lord, I beg your Lordship's forgiveness--I have certainly been
hurried by my excitement into expressions which I would gladly
withdraw."

"Hear me, sir," replied the earl, with a composure which, under the
circumstances, was wonderful; "it is the first time in my life that any
one has presumed to speak to me in such a manner, and to use such
language; and I will neither forget it, sir, nor forgive it."

"Then, my Lord, I take the liberty of reasserting what I had withdrawn,"
said Gammon, his blood appearing to flow like liquid fire in all his
veins. He had never given Lord Dreddlington credit for being able to
exhibit the spirit and self-command which he was then displaying. The
earl bowed loftily as Gammon spoke; and on his concluding, said with
haughty composure--

"When I entered your room, sir, that document caught my eye
accidentally; and on seeing upon the outside of it--for no farther have
I looked--the name of my own son-in-law, it was but natural that I
should suppose there could be no objection to my continuing to examine
the outside. That _was_ my opinion, sir--that _is_ my opinion; your
presumptuous expressions, sir, cannot change that opinion, nor make me
forget our relative positions," he added loftily; "and I once more
demand, sir, what is the meaning of that extraordinary document?"

Mr. Gammon was taken quite by surprise by this calmness and resolution
on the part of the earl; and while his Lordship spoke, and for some
moments afterwards, gazed at him sternly, yet irresolutely, his
faculties strained to their utmost, to determine upon the course he
should take, in so totally unexpected an emergency. He was not long,
however, in deciding.

"Since your Lordship desires information from me, let me request you to
be seated," said he, in a tone and with an air of profound courtesy,
such as, in its turn, took his noble companion by surprise; and he
slowly resumed his seat, Gammon also sitting down nearly opposite to
him. "May I, in the first place, venture to inquire to what circumstance
I am indebted, my Lord, for the honor of this visit?" he inquired.

"Oh, sir--sir--by the way--indeed you may well ask--you must have
heard"--suddenly and vehemently interrupted the earl, whose mind could
hold but one important matter at a time.

"To what does your Lordship allude?" inquired Gammon, who knew perfectly
well all the while. Having had a hint that matters were going wrong with
the Artificial Rain Company, he had contrived to creep out of it, by
selling such shares as he held, at a little loss certainly--and he would
have done the same for the earl had it been practicable; but his
Lordship's sudden journey into Hertfordshire had prevented his
communicating with his Lordship, till the time for acting had passed.
Now, therefore, he resolved to be taken by surprise.

"To what do I allude, sir!" echoed the earl, with much agitation, taking
the newspaper from his pocket--"The Artificial Rain Company, sir"----

"Well, my Lord!"--exclaimed Gammon, impatiently.

"Sir, it is gone! Blown up! Entirely disappeared, sir!"

"Gone! Blown up! The Artificial Rain Company? Oh, my Lord, it's
impossible!" cried Gammon, with well-feigned amazement.

"Sir--it is clean gone. Sir Sharper Bubble has absconded!" His Lordship
handed the paper to Mr. Gammon, who read the paragraph (which he had
perused some hour or two before in bed, where his own copy of the
_Morning Growl_ was at that moment lying) with every appearance of
horror, and the newspaper quite shook in his trembling hands!

"It cannot--it _cannot_ be true, my Lord!" said he, his eyes glued to
the paper.

"Sir, it _is_. I have been myself to the Company's office--it is quite
closed--shut up; there is only an old woman there, sir! And, at the
bankers', the only answer is--'Account closed!'"

"Then I am nearly a couple of thousand pounds poorer--my God! what shall
I do? Do, my Lord, let us drive off instantly to Sir Sharper Bubble's
house, and see if he be really gone. It may be a villainous fabrication
altogether--I never will believe that such a man--How miserable that
both your Lordship and I should have been out of town yesterday!"

Thus Gammon went on, with great eagerness, hoping to occupy Lord
Dreddlington's thoughts exclusively with the matter; but he was
mistaken. The earl, after a little pause, reverted to the previous
subject, and repeated his inquiry as to the rent-charge, with an air of
such serious determination as soon satisfied Gammon that there was no
evading the crisis which had so suddenly arisen. With the topic, his
Lordship also unconsciously changed his manner, which was now one of
offended majesty.

"Sir," said he, with stately deliberation, "what you have said to myself
personally, cannot be unsaid; but I desire a plain answer, Mr. Gammon,
to a plain question. Is the document which I had in my hand, an
instrument giving you--gracious Heaven!--a charge of two thousand pounds
a-year upon my son-in-law's estate? Sir, once for all, I peremptorily
insist on an answer before I leave your chambers; and, if I do not
obtain it, I shall instantly cause a rigorous inquiry to be set on
foot."

["You drivelling obstinate old fool!" thought Gammon, _looking_, the
while with mild anxiety, at the earl, "if you were _to drop down dead at
my feet_, now, at this moment, what vexation you would save me! Did it
ever before fall to the lot of mortal man to have to deal with two such
idiots as you and Titmouse?"]

"Well, then, my Lord, since you are so pertinacious on the
point--retaining my strong opinion concerning the very unwarrantable
means which enable you to put the question to me--I disdain equivocation
or further concealment," he continued with forced composure, "and
distinctly admit that the document which was lately in your Lordship's
hands, _is_ an instrument completely executed with all due form, having
the effect which it professes to have. It gives me, my Lord, a
rent-charge for the term of my life, of two thousand pounds a-year upon
Mr. Titmouse's estate of Yatton."

"Good God, sir!" exclaimed the earl, gazing at Gammon, as if
thunderstruck with an answer which, nevertheless, he could not but have
calculated upon--and which was indeed inevitable.

"That is the fact, my Lord, undoubtedly," said Gammon, with the air of a
man who has made up his mind to encounter something very serious.

"There never was such a thing heard of, sir! Two thousand pounds a-year
given to his solicitor by my son-in-law! Why, he is a mere boy"----

"He was old enough to marry the Lady Cecilia, my Lord," interrupted
Gammon, calmly, but very bitterly.

"That may be, sir," replied the earl, his face faintly flushing--"but he
is ignorant of business, sir--of the world--or you must have taken
advantage of him when he was intoxicated."

"Nothing--nothing of the kind, my Lord. Never was Mr. Titmouse more
sober--never in fuller possession of his faculties--never less in
liquor--never did he do anything more deliberately, than when he signed
that conveyance."

"Why, have you purchased it, sir? Given consideration for it?" inquired
the earl, with a perplexed air.

"Why did not your Lordship make that inquiry before you felt yourself at
liberty to make the harsh and injurious comments which you have"----

"Sir, you evade my question."

"No, my Lord--I do not wish to do so. I _have_ given value for it--full
value; and Mr. Titmouse, if you ask him, will tell you so."

The earl paused.

"And is the consideration recorded in the deed, sir?"

"It is, my Lord--and truly."

"I must again ask you, sir--do you mean to tell me that you have given
full value for this rent-charge?"

"Full value, my Lord."

"Then, why all this mystery, Mr. Gammon?"

"Let me ask, in my turn, my Lord, why all these questions about a matter
with which you have nothing to do? Would it not be much better for your
Lordship to attend to _your own_ affairs, just now, after the very
alarming"----

"Sir--sir--I--I--that is--_my_ concern," stammered the earl, very nearly
thrust out of his course by this stroke of Gammon's; but he soon
recovered himself--for the topic they were discussing had taken a
thorough hold of his mind. "Did you give a pecuniary consideration, Mr.
Gammon?"

"I gave a large sum in ready money; and the remainder is expressed to
be, my long and arduous services to Mr. Titmouse, in putting him into
possession of his property."

"Will you, then, favor me with a copy of this deed, that I may examine
it, and submit it to competent"----

"No, my Lord, I will do no such thing," replied Gammon, peremptorily.

"You will not, sir?" repeated the earl, after a pause, his cold blue eye
fixed upon that of Gammon, and his face full of stern and haughty
defiance.

"No, my Lord, I will not. Probably _that_ answer is explicit enough!"
replied Gammon, returning Lord Dreddlington's look with unwavering
steadfastness. There was a pause.

"But one conclusion can be drawn, then, from your refusal, sir--one
highly disadvantageous to you, sir. No one can avoid the inference that
there has been foul play, and fraud of the grossest descrip"----

"You are a peer of the realm, Lord Dreddlington; try to be a
_gentleman_," said Gammon, who had turned deadly pale. The earl's eye
continued fixed on Gammon, and his lip slightly quivered. He seemed
amazed at Gammon's audacity.

"Let me recommend your Lordship to be more cautious and measured in your
language," said Gammon, visibly struggling to speak with
calmness--"especially concerning matters on which you are
utterly--profoundly ignorant"----

"I will not long remain so, Mr. Gammon; you may rely upon it," replied
the earl, with sustained firmness and hauteur.

["Shall I? shall I? _shall_ I prostrate you, insolent old fool! soul and
body?" thought Gammon.]

"I will instantly seek out Mr. Titmouse," continued the earl, "and will
soon get at the bottom of this--this--monstrous transaction."

"I cannot, of course, control your Lordship's motions. If you _do_ apply
to Mr. Titmouse, you will in all probability receive the information you
seek for--that is, if Mr. Titmouse _dare_, without first consulting
_me_"----

"If--Mr.--Titmouse--_dare_, sir?" echoed the earl, calmly and
scornfully.

"Yes--_dare_!" furiously retorted Gammon, his eye, as it were,
momentarily flashing fire.

"Sir, this is very highly amusing!" said Lord Dreddlington, trying to
smile; but it was impossible. His hands trembled so much that he could
not draw on his glove without great effort.

"To _me_, my Lord, it is very--very painful," replied Gammon, with an
agitation which he could not conceal--"not painful on my own account,
but your Lordship's"----

"Sir, I appreciate your presumptuous sympathy," interrupted Lord
Dreddlington. "In the mean while, you may depend upon my taking steps
forthwith of a somewhat decisive character. We shall see, sir, how long
transactions of this sort can be concealed."

At this point, Gammon had finally determined upon making his
long-dreaded disclosure to the Earl of Dreddlington--one which he knew
would instantly topple him down headlong over the battlements of his
lofty and unapproachable pride, as though he had been struck by
lightning. Gammon felt himself getting colder every minute--his
agitation driving the blood from his extremities back upon his heart.

"Your Lordship has spoken of _concealment_," he commenced with visible
emotion.--"Your Lordship's offensive and most uncalled-for observations
upon my motives and conduct, irritated me for the moment--but that is
gone by. They have, however, worked my feelings up to a point which will
enable me, now, perhaps, better than on any future occasion, to make a
disclosure to your Lordship of a secret, which ever since it unhappily
came to my knowledge, so help me Heaven! has made me the most miserable
of men." There was something in Gammon's countenance and manner which
compelled the earl to sit down again in the chair from which he had
risen, and where he remained gazing in wondering silence at Gammon, who
proceeded--"It is a communication which will require all your Lordship's
strength of mind to prevent its overpowering you"----

"Gracious God, sir, what do you mean? What do you mean, Mr. Gammon? Go
on, sir!" said the earl, turning very pale.

"I would even now, my Lord, shrink from the precipice which I have
approached, and leave your Lordship in ignorance of that which--alas,
alas!--no earthly power can remedy; but your Lordship's singular
discovery of the rent-charge, which we have talked about so long and
anxiously, and determination to become fully acquainted with the
circumstances out of which it has arisen, leave me no option."

"Sir, I desire that, without so much circumlocution, you will come to
the point. I cannot divine what you are talking about--what you meditate
telling me; but I beg of you, sir, to communicate to me what you know,
and leave me to bear it as best I can."

"Then your Lordship shall be obeyed.--I said, some little time ago, that
the instrument granting me the rent-charge upon the Yatton property,
recited, as a part of the consideration, my arduous, long-continued, and
successful exertions to place Mr. Titmouse in possession of that fine
estate. It was I, my Lord, who searched for him till I found him--the
rightful heir to the Yatton property--him, the possible successor to
your Lordship in your ancient barony. Night and day I have toiled for
him--have overcome all obstacles, and at length placed him in the
splendid position which he now occupies. He is not, my Lord, naturally
of a generous or grateful disposition, as perhaps your Lordship also may
be aware; and had I not insisted on an adequate return for my services,
he would have given me none. Therefore I required him, nay, I extorted
from him the instrument in question." Mr. Gammon paused for a moment.

"Well, sir. Go on! I hear you," said the earl, somewhat sternly; on
which Gammon resumed.

"How I first acquired a knowledge that Mr. Aubrey was wrongfully
enjoying the Yatton estates, is of no moment to your Lordship; but one
thing _does_ concern your Lordship to know, and me to be believed by
your Lordship in telling you--that, so help me Heaven! at the time that
I discovered Mr. Titmouse behind the counter of Mr. Tag-rag, in Oxford
Street, and up till within a couple of months ago, I had no more doubt
about his being entitled, as really the heir-at-law"----The earl gave a
sudden start. "My Lord, I would even now beg your Lordship to let me
take some other opportunity, when we are both calmer, of explaining"----

"Go on, sir," said the earl, firmly, but in a much lower tone of voice
than that in which he had before spoken, and sitting with his eyes
riveted on those of Mr. Gammon; who, notwithstanding his Lordship's
observation, was compelled by his own sickening agitation again to pause
for a moment or two. Then he resumed. "I was saying, my Lord, that, till
about two months ago, I had no more doubt than I have of your Lordship's
now sitting before me, that Mr. Titmouse was the legitimate descendant
of the person entitled to enjoy the Yatton estates in preference to Mr.
Aubrey. His pedigree was subjected to the severest scrutiny which the
law of England can devise, and was pronounced complete"----Gammon beheld
Lord Dreddlington quivering all over; "but to my horror--only _I_ know
it, except Mr. Titmouse, to whom I told it--I have recently discovered,
by a most extraordinary accident, that we were, and are, all mistaken."
Lord Dreddlington had grown deadly pale, and his lips, which had lost
their color, seemed to open unconsciously, while he inclined towards
Gammon; "and--I may as well tell your Lordship at once the worst--this
young man, Titmouse, is only a natural son, and what is worst, of a
woman who had a former husband living"----

Lord Dreddlington started up from his chair, and staggered away from it,
his arms moving to and fro--his face the very picture of horror. It had
gone of a ghastly whiteness. His lips moved, but he uttered no sound.

"Oh, my Lord! For God's sake be calm!" cried out Gammon, dreadfully
shocked, rushing towards the earl, who kept staggering back, his hands
stretched out as if to keep off some approaching object. "My Lord! Lord
Dreddlington, hear me. For Heaven's sake, let me bring you back to your
seat. It's only a little faintness!"--He put his arm round the earl,
endeavoring to draw him back towards the easy-chair; but felt him
slipping down on the floor, his legs yielding under him; then his head
suddenly sank on one side, and the next moment he lay, as it were,
collapsed, upon the floor, partly supported by Gammon, who, in a fearful
state of agitation, shouted out for the laundress.

"Untie his neck-handkerchief, sir; loose his shirt-collar!" cried the
woman; and stooping down, while Gammon supported his head, she removed
the pressure from his neck. He was breathing heavily. "For God's sake,
run off for a doctor--any one--the nearest you can find," gasped Gammon.
"The carriage standing before the inn is his Lordship's; you'll see his
footman--tell him his Lordship's in a fit, and send him off also for a
doctor!"

The laundress, nearly as much agitated as her master, instantly started
off as she had been directed. Gammon, finding no signs of returning
consciousness, with a great effort managed to get his Lordship into the
bedroom; and had just laid him down on the bed when the footman burst
into the chamber in a terrible fright. He almost jumped off the floor on
catching sight of the prostrate and inanimate figure of his master--and
was for a few moments so stupefied that he could not hear Gammon
ordering him to start off in quest of a doctor, which at length,
however, he did,--leaving Gammon alone with his victim. For a few
frightful moments, he felt as if he had murdered Lord Dreddlington, and
must fly for it. He pressed his hands to his forehead, as if to recall
his scattered faculties.

"What is to be done?" thought he. "Is this apoplexy? paralysis?
epilepsy? or what? Will he recover? Will it affect his reason?--_Will he
recover?_ If so--how deal with the damning discovery he has made? Will
he have sense enough to keep his own counsel? If he survive, and
preserve his reason--all is right--everything succeeds. I am his master
to the end of his days!--What a horrid while they are!--Curse those
doctors! The wretches! never to be found when they are wanted. He's
dying before my very eyes!--How shall I say this happened? A fit,
brought on by agitation occasioned--(ay, that will do)--by the failure
of the Company. Ah! there's the newspaper he brought with him, and put
into my hands," he thought, as his eye glanced at the newspaper lying on
the table in the adjoining room--"This will give color to my version of
the affair!" With this, he hastily seized the paper in question, and
thrust it into one of the coat-pockets of Lord Dreddlington; and the
moment after, in came the laundress, followed by the medical man whom
she had gone in quest of; the door hardly having been closed before a
thundering knock announced the arrival of the footman with another
doctor; to both of whom Gammon with haste and agitation gave the account
of his Lordship's seizure which he had previously determined upon giving
to all inquiries.--"A decided case of apoplexy," said the fat
bald-headed old gentleman brought in by the laundress, and who had been
forty years in practice; and he proceeded hastily to raise the earl into
a nearly sitting posture, directing the windows to be thrown open as
widely as possible. "Clearly paralysis," said the spectacled young
gentleman who had been fetched by the footman, and who had been
established in practice only a fortnight; was hot from the hospitals;
and had opened a little surgery nearly opposite to that of the old
gentleman.

"It _isn't_, sir--it's apoplexy."

"Sir, it's nearer epilepsy"----

"Listen to his _breathing_, sir," said the old gentleman, scornfully.

"For God's sake, gentlemen, DO something!" interposed Gammon,
furiously--"Good God! would you have his Lordship die before your eyes?"

"Put his feet into hot water instantly--get mustard plasters ready,"
commenced the old gentleman, in a mighty bustle, turning up his
coat-sleeves, and getting out his lancets; while the young gentleman,
with a very indignant air, still resolved to give the distinguished
patient the advantage of the newest improvements in medical science,
whipped out a stethoscope, and was screwing it together, when the old
gentleman in a rage cried "Pish!" and knocked it out of his hand:
whereupon the young gentleman seemed disposed to strike him!

"Oh my God!" cried Gammon--and added, addressing the footman--"set off
for Dr. Bailey instantly--these fools will let him die before their
eyes!" Off sprang the man, and was out of sight in a twinkling. 'T was
very _natural_ (though, I must own, somewhat inconvenient and unseemly)
for these worthy rivals to behave in this way, seeing it was the first
time in his life that either had been called in to a nobleman, and very
probably it would be the last--at least it ought to have been; and each
wished to cure or kill the distinguished patient in his own way. 'T was
also the conflict between the old and the new systems of medical
science; between old practice and young speculation--and between these
two stools was his Lordship falling to the ground, with a witness. One
felt the pulse, the other insisted on applying the stethoscope to his
heart; one remarked on the coldness of the extremities--the other said
the pupils were fixed and dilated. One was for bleeding at the arm, the
other for opening the jugular vein: one for cupping at the nape of the
neck--the other on the temple; one spoke of electricity--'t would
stimulate the nervous system to throw off the blood from the brain;--the
other said, "stimulate the whole surface---wrap him in a mustard blister
from head to foot, and shave and blister the head." One verily believed
his Lordship was dying; the other declared he was dead already, through
_his_ mode of treatment not having been adopted. Each would have given
twenty guineas to have been the only one called in. All this horrid
foolery occupied far less time than is requisite to describe
it--scarcely a minute indeed--and almost drove Gammon into frenzy.
Rushing to the window, he called to a porter in the inn to start off for
"any other medical man who could be found!"--which brought the two to
their senses, such as they were. Suffice it to say, that the jugular
vein was opened in a trice; mustard plasters and hot water applied as
quickly as they could be procured; and a cupping-case having been sent
for, blood was taken pretty freely from the nape of the neck--and these
two blood-lettings saved Lord Dreddlington's life--whether to Gammon's
delight or disappointment I shall not take upon me to decide. By the
time that the great man--the experienced and skilful king's physician,
Dr. Bailey--had arrived, the earl was beginning to exhibit slight
symptoms of returning consciousness, and was recovering from an attack
of partial apoplexy. Dr. Bailey remained with his Lordship for nearly
half an hour; and, on leaving, gave it as his opinion that, provided no
fresh seizure occurred during the ensuing two hours, it would be
practicable--as it was, of course, very desirable--to remove his
Lordship to his own house. The period named having passed without his
Lordship's having experienced any relapse, it was determined on removing
him. He was to be accompanied by one of the medical men--both would fain
have gone, had the chariot admitted of it; but Gammon soon settled the
matter by naming the elder practitioner, and dismissing the younger with
a couple of guineas. Then Gammon himself set off in a hackney-coach,
about an hour before the carriage started, in order to prepare the
household of the earl, and secure a safe communication of the alarming
event, to the Lady Cecilia. On reaching the earl's mansion, to Gammon's
surprise a hackney-coach was driving off from before the door; and, on
entering the house, guess his amazement at hearing, from the agitated
porter, that Lady Cecilia had just gone up to the drawing-room in
terrible trouble. Gammon darted up-stairs, unable to imagine by what
means Lady Cecilia could have been apprised of the event. He found her
in out-door costume, sitting sobbing on the sofa, attended anxiously by
Miss Macspleuchan. The plain fact was, that she had just been driven
out of her own house by a couple of executions, put in that morning by
two creditors of Titmouse, by whom they had been treated, the evening
before, very insolently! Mr. Gammon's agitated appearance alarmed Miss
Macspleuchan, but was not noticed by her more distressed companion; and,
as soon as Mr. Gammon found the means of doing it unobserved, he made a
sign to Miss Macspleuchan that he had something of great importance to
communicate to her. Leaving the Lady Cecilia, a short time afterwards,
in the care of her maid, Miss Macspleuchan followed Mr. Gammon
down-stairs into the library, and was in a few hurried words apprised of
the illness of the earl--of the cause of it--(viz. the sudden failure of
an important speculation in which the earl was interested)--and that his
Lordship would be brought home in about an hour's time or so, in company
with a medical man. Miss Macspleuchan was for a moment very nearly
overcome, even to fainting; but, being a woman of superior strength of
character, she soon rallied, and immediately addressed herself to the
necessity of warding off any sudden and violent shock from Lady Cecilia,
especially with reference to her delicate state of health. It was
absolutely necessary, however, that her Ladyship should be promptly
apprised of the painful occurrence, lest an infinitely greater shock
should be inflicted on her by the earl's arrival. Gently and gradually
as Miss Macspleuchan broke the intelligence to Lady Cecilia, it
occasioned her falling into a swoon--for it will be borne in mind that
her nerves had been before sufficiently shaken. On recovering, she
requested Mr. Gammon to be sent for, and with considerable agitation
inquired into the occasion and manner of the earl's illness. As soon as
he had mentioned that it was a paragraph in the day's paper that first
occasioned in the earl the agitation which had induced such serious
consequences----

"What! in the papers already? Is it about that wretch Titmouse?" she
inquired with a languid air of disgust.

"No, indeed, Lady Cecilia, Mr. Titmouse has nothing to do with it,"
replied Gammon, with a slight inward spasm; and, just as he had
succeeded in giving her to understand the cause to which he chose to
refer the earl's illness, carriage-wheels were heard, followed in a
second or two by a tremendous thundering at the door, which made even
Gammon almost start from his chair, and threw Lady Cecilia into a second
swoon. It was providential, perhaps, that it had that effect; for had
she gone to the windows, and seen her insensible father, with care and
difficulty, lifted out of his carriage--his shirt-collar, and a white
neck-handkerchief, thrown round his shoulders, partially crimsoned; and
in that way, amid a little crowd which had suddenly gathered round,
carried into the house, and borne up-stairs to his bed-chamber--it might
have had a very serious effect, indeed, upon her Ladyship. Gammon
stepped for an instant to the window--he saw the poor old peer in the
state I have described, and the sight blanched his cheeks. Leaving her
Ladyship in the hands of Miss Macspleuchan, and her attendants, he
followed into the earl's bedroom; and was a little relieved, some
quarter of an hour afterwards, at finding, that, though the earl was
much exhausted with the fatigue of removal, he was in a much more
satisfactory state than could have been anticipated. As his Lordship's
own physician (who had been summoned instantly on the earl's arrival
home) intimated that a little repose was essential to his Lordship, and
that no one should remain in the room whose services were not
indispensable, Gammon took his departure, after an anxious inquiry as to
Lady Cecilia--intending to return before night, personally to ascertain
the state of the earl and her Ladyship.

A mighty sigh escaped from the oppressed bosom of Gammon, as soon as,
having quitted the house, he found himself in the street alone. He
walked for some minutes straight on, irresolute as to whether he should
direct his steps--to his own chambers, to the office in Hatton Garden,
or to Mr. Titmouse's residence in Park Lane. At length he determined on
returning, in the first instance, to his own chambers, and bent his
steps accordingly; his mind so absorbed in thought, that he scarcely saw
any one he met or passed. _Here_ was a state of things, thought he,
which he had brought about! And what must be his own course now? For a
moment or two he was in a state of feeling which we may compare to that
of a person who, with ignorant curiosity, has set into motion the
machinery of some prodigious engine, which it required but a touch to
effect--and then stands suddenly paralyzed--bewildered--confounded at
the complicated movements going on all around him, and perhaps the
alarming noises accompanying them--not daring to move a hair's-breadth
in any direction for fear of destruction. He soon, however, recovered
himself, and began very seriously to contemplate the perilous position
in which he now found himself placed.

Here was Lord Dreddlington, in the first place, involved to a most
alarming extent of liability in respect of his connection with one of
the bubble companies, into an alliance with which it was Gammon alone
who had seduced him. But he quickly lost sight of that, as a very light
matter compared with what had subsequently happened, and the prodigious
consequences to which it might possibly lead--and that, too,
immediately.

This crisis had been precipitated by an accident--an occurrence which he
felt that no man could have foreseen or calculated upon. Certainly it
might all be traced to his own oversight in leaving the conveyance of
his rent-charge--so all-important a document--upon his table, though
for only a minute or two's absence; for he had not quitted his chambers
more than five minutes before he had re-entered them, finding the Earl
of Dreddlington there--of all persons in the world the very last whom
Gammon would have wished to be aware of the existence of such an
instrument. Who could have imagined--calculated on such an occurrence?
Never before had the earl visited him at his own private residence; and
to have come just precisely at the very moment--and yet, thought Gammon,
almost starting back a step or two--when one came to think of it--what
was more likely than that, on seeing the paragraph in the morning paper,
his Lordship should have done the very thing he had, and driven down to
Mr. Gammon for an explanation? Bah! thought Mr. Gammon, and stamped his
foot on the pavement.

[Ay, Satan, it _was_ a very slippery trick indeed, which you had played
this acute friend of yours.]

"But the thing is done; and what am I now to do? What can I do? First of
all, there's Titmouse--where is that little miscreant at this moment?
Will he follow his wife to Grosvenor Square? Will the earl have
recovered, before I can see Titmouse, sufficiently to recollect what has
happened? Will they allow him to be admitted into the sick-chamber?
Suppose his presence should remind the earl of what he has this day
heard? Suppose he should recover his senses--what course will he take?
Will he acquaint his daughter that she is married to a vulgar
bastard--oh, frightful!--she and he the two proudest persons, perhaps,
living! Will they spurn him from them with loathing and horror?--expose
the little impostor to the world?--and take God knows what steps
against _me_, for the share I have had in the matter?--Oh,
impossible!--inconceivable! They can never blazon their own degradation
to the world! Or will Lord Dreddlington have discretion and self-command
sufficient to keep the blighting secret to himself? Will he rest
satisfied with my statement, or insist on conclusive proof and
corroboration? Will he call for vouchers--ah!" here he ground his teeth
together, for he recollected the trick which Titmouse had played him in
destroying the precious documents already spoken of. "If the little
wretch do not hear of what has happened from any one else, shall I tell
him that I have communicated his secret to Lord Dreddlington? Fancy him
and his wife meeting after they know all!--or him and the earl! Suppose
the earl should _die_--and without having disclosed this secret to any
one? Oh, oh! what a godsend would that be! All straight then, to the end
of the chapter!--How near it was this morning!--If I had but suffered
those two boobies to wrangle together till it was too late!"--A _little_
color came into Mr. Gammon's cheek at this point--as if he felt that
perhaps he was then going a trifle too far in entertaining such
very--decisive--wishes and regrets: still he could not dismiss the
reflection; nay, what was more probable than that so desperate a shock,
suffered by a man of his advanced years, might be only the precursor of
a second and fatal fit of apoplexy?--Dr. Bailey had expressed some fears
of that sort to-day, recollected Gammon!

If Mr. Gammon had seen the watchful eyes at that moment settled upon
him, by two persons who were approaching him, and who passed him
unobserved; and could have dreamed of the errand which had brought those
two persons into that part of the town--it might have set his busy brain
upon quite a new track of harassing conjecture and apprehension. But he
was far too intently occupied with his thoughts to notice any one, as he
walked slowly down Holborn; and some five minutes afterwards, having
got to within a hundred yards of Saffron Hill, he was startled out of
his meditations by hearing a voice calling out his name--and looking
towards the middle of the street, whence the sound came, beheld Mr.
Titmouse, beckoning to him eagerly, out of a hackney-coach, which was
slowly driving up Holborn, and at Titmouse's bidding drew up to the
curb-stone.

"Oh--I say! Mr. Gammon!--'pon my life--_here's_ a precious mess!--Such a
devil of a row!"--commenced Titmouse, alarmedly, speaking in a low voice
through the coach window.

"What, sir?" inquired Gammon, sternly.

"Why, eh? heard of it? Lady Cicely"----

"I _have_ heard of it, sir," replied Gammon, gloomily--"and I have, in
my turn, something of far greater consequence to tell you.--Let the
coachman turn back and drive you to my chambers, where I will meet you
in a quarter of an hour's time."

"Oh Lord! Won't you get in and tell me _now_?--Do, Mr. Gam"----

"No, sir!" replied Gammon, almost fiercely, and walked away, leaving
Titmouse in a pretty fright.

"Now, shall I tell him, or not?" thought Gammon: and after some minutes'
anxious consideration, determined upon doing so--and on threatening him,
that if he did not change his courses, so far as money went,
he--Gammon--would instantly blast him, by exposure of his real character
and circumstances to the whole world. What might be the actual extent of
his embarrassments, Gammon knew not, nor was he aware of the fact, that
Titmouse was at that moment getting into the hands of swindling
money-lenders. In point of dress and manners, he was the same that he
had ever been, since fortune had given him the means of dressing
according to his fancy, and the fashion; but any one looking at his
face, could see in the slightly bloodshot eye, its jaded expression,
and the puffy appearance of his face, the results of systematic excess
and debauchery. When Gammon joined him at his chambers, and told him the
events of the day, Titmouse exhibited affright, that to any other
beholder than one so troubled as Gammon, would have appeared ludicrous;
but as that gentleman's object was to subdue and terrify his companion
into an implicit submission to his will, he dismissed him for the day,
simply enjoining him to keep away from Grosvenor Square and Park Lane
till an early hour in the ensuing morning--by which time events, which
might have happened in the interval, might determine the course which
Gammon should dictate to Titmouse. At that time Gammon was strongly
inclined to insist on Titmouse's going to the Continent for a little
while, to be out of harm's way; but, in fact, he felt dreadfully
embarrassed to know how to dispose of Titmouse--regarding him with
feelings somewhat, perhaps, akin to those with which Frankenstein beheld
his monster.




CHAPTER VIII.


But to return to Lord Dreddlington. The remedies resorted to so speedily
after his seizure at Mr. Gammon's chambers, had most materially
counteracted the effects of the terrible shock which he had sustained,
and which, but for such interference, would in all probability have
proved fatal in its consequences. Shortly after his removal to his own
house, he sank into tranquil and safe sleep, which continued, with a few
interruptions, for several hours--during which his brain recovered
itself, in a considerable measure, from the sudden and temporary
pressure which it had experienced. Towards seven o'clock in the evening,
there were sitting, on one side of the bed Miss Macspleuchan, and on the
other the Lady Cecilia--who also had rallied from the shock which she
had sustained, and now, occasionally shedding tears, sat gazing in
melancholy silence at the countenance of her father. She was certainly a
miserable young woman,--was Lady Cecilia,--ignorant though she might be
of the real extent of disaster consequent upon her alliance with
Titmouse, whom she had long hated and despised, on all occasions
avoiding his company. Their almost total estrangement was quite
notorious in society!

His Lordship's physician had quitted the chamber for a few minutes, to
make arrangements for continuing with him during the night; and neither
Miss Macspleuchan nor Lady Cecilia had spoken for some time. At length
the earl, who had become rather restless, faintly muttered at intervals
to himself the words--

"Bubble--villain--Blackwall"----

"You see," whispered Miss Macspleuchan, "what he's thinking of. He dined
with those people, you know." Lady Cecilia nodded in silence. Presently
his Lordship resumed--

"_Account closed!_--Call on Mr. Gammon--Is Mr. Gammon at home?"----

The current of his recollections had now brought him to the point of
danger; and after pausing for a moment, a troubled expression came over
his face--he was evidently realizing the commencement of the terrible
scene in Mr. Gammon's room--then he seemed to have lost the train of his
thoughts for a while, as his features slowly resumed their previous
placidity; but the troubled aspect presently returned: his lips were
suddenly compressed, and his brow corrugated, as if with the emotion of
anger or indignation.

"Monstrous! _Two thousand pounds?_" He spoke these words in a much
stronger voice than those preceding.

"Oh, dear!--I should have thought his Lordship had lost much more than
_that_," whispered Miss Macspleuchan, in a low tone.

"Insist!--Titmouse--Titmouse"--his lips slightly quivered, and he paused
for a while. "Shocking! What _will_ she"----an expression of agony came
over his face.

"Poor papa! He's evidently heard it all!" whispered Lady Cecilia,
faintly.

"Hush!" exclaimed Miss Macspleuchan, raising her finger to her
lips--adding presently, "if he goes on in this way, I shall go and bring
in Dr. Whittington."

"Cecilia!--Cecilia!"--continued the earl; and suddenly opening his eyes,
gazed forward, and then on each side, with a dull confused stare. Then
he closed them, muttering--"I certainly thought Mr. Gammon was here!"
Shortly afterwards he opened them again; and his head being inclined
towards the side where Lady Cecilia was sitting, they fell upon, and
seemed to be arrested by her countenance. After gazing at her for some
moments very, very sorrowfully, he again closed his eyes,
murmuring--"Poor Cecilia!"

"I really think, my dear, you 'd better leave the room," faltered Miss
Macspleuchan; imagining, from the state of her own feelings, that those
of Lady Cecilia would be overpowering her--for nothing could be more
soul-touching than the tone in which the earl had last spoken.

"No; he's asleep again," replied Lady Cecilia, calmly,--and for a
quarter of an hour all was again silent. Then the earl sighed; and
opening his eyes, looked full at Lady Cecilia, and with a more natural
expression.

"Kiss me, Cecilia," said he, gently; and raising both his arms a little,
while she leaned forward and kissed his forehead, he very feebly placed
them round her, but they almost immediately sank on the bed again, as if
he had not strength to keep them extended.

"We will live together, Cecilia, again," murmured the earl.

"Dear papa, don't distress yourself; if you do, I really must go away
from you."

"No, no; you must not, Cecilia," murmured the earl, sadly and faintly,
and shaking his head.

"Have you seen him to-day?" he presently asked with a little more
energy, as if he were becoming more and more thoroughly awake, and aware
of his position; and there was a marked difference in the expression of
his eye--partly perplexed, partly alarmed.

"No, papa--I left the moment it happened, and came here; and have been
here ever since. Do, dear papa, be calm!" added Lady Cecilia, with
perfect composure.

"There!--I am gone blind _again_," exclaimed the earl, suddenly, and
raised his trembling hands to his eyes.

"_So you knew it all?_" said he, presently, tremulously removing his
hands, and looking up, as if the momentary obscuration of his sight had
ceased.

"Oh yes, papa, of course! How could I help it? Try to go to sleep again,
dear papa." There was a faint dash of petulance in her manner.

They were at terrible cross purposes.

His eye remained fixed steadily on that of his daughter. "Is it not
horrible, Cecilia?" said he, with a shudder.

"Dear papa, I don't know what you mean," replied Cecilia, quite startled
by the tone of his voice, and the look of his eye. There was nothing
wild or unnatural about it. The eye seemed that of a man in his full
senses, but horrified by some frightful recollection or other.

"I thought it would have killed her," he muttered, closing his eyes,
while a faint flush came over his face, but that of Lady Cecilia turned
deadly pale.

"Don't speak again, dear," whispered Miss Macspleuchan, herself a little
startled by the earl's manner--"he's wandering--he'll go to sleep
presently."

"Yes, in my grave, madam," replied the earl, solemnly, in a hollow
tone--at the same time turning towards Miss Macspleuchan an eye which
suddenly blanched her face--"but even there I shall not _forget_!" She
gazed at him in silence, and apprehensively, trembling from head to
foot.

There ensued a pause of a minute or two.

"Oh, Cecilia!" said the earl, presently, shaking his head, and looking
at her with the same terrible expression which had so startled her
before--"that I had first followed you to your grave!"

"My dear papa, you are only dreaming!"

"No, I am not. Oh! how can _you_, Cecilia, be so calm here, when you
know that you have married a"----

Lady Cecilia glanced hurriedly at Miss Macspleuchan, who, having risen a
little from her chair, was leaning forward in an agitated manner, and
straining her ear to catch every word--

"What are you talking about, papa?" gasped Lady Cecilia, while her face
became of a deadly whiteness.

"Why, I thought you knew it all," said the earl, sustained and
stimulated by the intensity of his feelings--"that this
Titmouse--is--Mr. Gammon has acknowledged all--an infamous impostor--an
illegitimate"----

Miss Macspleuchan, with a faint shriek, rang the bell at the bed-head
violently; but before she or any one else could reach her, Lady Cecilia
had fallen heavily on the floor, where she lay unconsciously, her maid
falling down over her as she rushed into the room, alarmed by the sudden
and violent ringing of the bell. All was confusion and horror. Lady
Cecilia was instantly carried out insensible; the earl was found to have
been seized with a second fit of apoplexy. Dr. Bailey was quickly in
attendance, followed soon after by an eminent accoucheur, whom it had
been found necessary to send for, Lady Cecilia's illness having assumed
the most alarming character conceivable. When Miss Macspleuchan had in
some measure recovered from her distraction, she despatched a servant to
implore the instant attendance of the Duke and Duchess of Tantallan,
unable to bear the overwhelming horror occasioned to her by the
statement of the Earl of Dreddlington; and which, whether so astounding
and frightful a statement was founded in fact or not, and only a
delusion of the earl's, was likely to have given the unfortunate Lady
Cecilia her death-blow.

Both the duke and duchess--the nearest relatives of the earl then in
London (the duke being his brother-in-law)--were, within half an hour,
at Lord Dreddlington's and made acquainted with the fearful occasion of
what had happened. The duke and duchess were quite as proud and haughty
people as Lord Dreddlington; but the duke was a _little_--and only a
little--the earl's superior in point of understanding. When first told
of the earl's disclosure, he was told as if it were an ascertained fact;
and his horror knew no bounds. But when he came to inquire into the
matter, and found that it rested on no other foundation than the
distempered wanderings of a man whose brain was at the time laboring
under the effects of an apoplectic seizure, he began to feel a great
relief; especially when Miss Macspleuchan could mention no single
circumstance corroboratory of so amazing and frightful a representation.
At her suggestion, the duke, unable to render any personal service to
the earl, who was in the hands of the physicians, hurried home again,
and sent off a special messenger to Mr. Gammon, whose address Miss
Macspleuchan had given him, with the following note:--

     "The Duke of Tantallan presents his compliments to Mr. Gammon, and
     most earnestly begs that he will, without a moment's delay, favor
     the duke with a call in Portman Square, on business of the last
     importance.

              "Portman Square,
       Wednesday Evening, 9 o'clock."

A huge servant of the duke's--with powdered hair, silver epaulettes,
dark crimson coat, and white breeches, having altogether a most splendid
appearance--created something like a sensation in the immediate
neighborhood of Thavies' Inn, by inquiring, with a very impatient and
excited air, for "Thavies' Inn," and a "gentleman of the name of
_Gammon_" who was very naturally supposed to be honored by some special
and direct communication from the king, or at least some member of the
royal family. Gammon himself, who was in the act of opening his door to
go out and make his promised call of inquiry in Grosvenor Square--was
flustered for a moment, on finding himself stepping into the arms of
such an imposing personage; who said, as he gave him the letter, on
finding him to be Mr. Gammon--"From the Duke of Tantallan, sir. His
Grace, I believe, expects you immediately, sir."

Mr. Gammon hastily opened the letter, and having glanced at the
contents--"Give my compliments to his Grace, and say I will attend him
immediately," said he. The man withdrew, and Gammon returned into his
chamber, and sat for a few moments in the darkness--he having just
before put out his lamp. He burst into a cold sweat--"What's in the wind
now!" said he to himself. "Ah, why did I not ask the fellow?"--and
starting from his seat, he rushed down-stairs, and succeeded in calling
back the duke's servant just as he was turning out of the inn--"Do you
happen to have been into Grosvenor Square to-day?--And do you know how
the Earl of Dreddlington is?" inquired Gammon, anxiously.

"Yes, sir; his Lordship, and the Lady Cecilia Titmouse, are both
dangerously ill. I believe his Lordship, sir, has had a stroke--they say
it's the second he's had to-day--and her Ladyship is taken in labor, and
is in a shocking bad way, sir. The duke and duchess were sent for in a
dreadful hurry about an hour ago."

"Dear! I'm sorry to hear it! Thank you," replied Gammon, hastily turning
away a face which he felt must have gone of a ghastly paleness.

"It may be only to inquire about the Artificial Rain Company"--said
Gammon to himself, as, having procured a light, he poured himself out a
large glassful of brandy, and drank it off, to overcome a little sense
of faintness which he felt coming rapidly over him. "The duke is a
shareholder, I think. Not at all unlikely!--And as for Lady Cecilia's
illness--nothing so extraordinary about it--when one considers her
situation--and the shock occasioned by the earl's sudden and alarming
illness. But I must take a decided course, one way or another, with the
duke!--Suppose the earl has disclosed the affair to Lady Cecilia--and it
has got to the duke's ears?--Good heavens! how is one to deal with it?
Suppose I were to affect total ignorance about the matter--and swear
that it is altogether a delusion on the part of the earl?--That would be
rather a bold stroke, too!--Suppose the earl to _die_ of this bout--ah!
then there 's an end of the thing, and all's well, provided I can manage
Titmouse!--A second fit of apoplexy within twelve hours--that looks
well--humph!--If the earl _have_ mentioned the affair--and distinctly
and intelligibly--how far has he gone?--Did he name the
rent-charge?--Ah!--well, and suppose he did? What's easier than also to
deny _that_ altogether? But suppose Titmouse should be tampered with,
and pressed about the business? Perdition!--all is lost!--Yet they would
hardly like to defy me, and trumpet the thing abroad!--Then there's the
other course--to own that I am in possession of the fatal secret--that I
became so only recently; avow the reason of my taking the rent-charge;
and insist upon retaining it, as the condition of my secrecy? That also
is a bold stroke: both are bold!--Yet one of them I must choose!--Then,
suppose the earl to recover: he will never be the same man he was--that
I find is always the case--his mind, such as it is, will go nearly
altogether!--But if he recover only a glimmering even of sense--egad! 't
will require a little nerve, too, to deny the thing to his face, and
swear that the whole thing is the delusion of a brain disordered by
previous fright!--And suppose Lady Cecilia dies?--and leaves no
issue?--and then Lord Dreddlington follows her--by Heaven, this hideous
little devil _becomes Lord Drelincourt at once_!!"

This was the way in which Mr. Gammon turned the thing over in his
disturbed mind, as he walked rapidly towards Portman Square; and by the
time that he had reached the duke's house, he had finally determined on
the course he should pursue. Though his face was rather pale, he was
perfectly self-possessed and firm, at the moment of his being shown into
the library, where the duke was walking about, impatient for his
arrival.

"Gracious God, sir!"--commenced the duke, in a low tone, with much
agitation of manner, the moment that the servant had closed the door
behind him--"what is all this horrible news we hear about Mr. Titmouse?"

"_Horrible_ news--about Mr. Titmouse?" echoed Gammon, amazedly--"pardon
me--I don't understand your Grace! If you allude to the two
_executions_, which I'm sorry to hear"----

"Pho, sir! you are trifling! Believe me, this is a very awful moment to
all persons involved in what has taken place!" replied the duke, his
voice quivering with emotion.

"Your Grace will excuse me, but I _really_ cannot comprehend you!"----

"You soon shall, sir! I tell you, it may be a matter of infinite moment
to yourself personally, Mr. Gammon!"

"What _does_ your Grace mean?" inquired Gammon, respectfully, but
firmly--and throwing an expression of still greater amazement into his
face.

"Mean, sir? By----! that you have killed my Lord Dreddlington and the
Lady Cecilia," cried the duke, in a very violent manner.

"I wait to hear, as soon as your Grace may condescend to explain," said
Gammon, calmly.

"Explain, sir? Why, I have _already_ told and explained everything!"
replied the choleric duke, who imagined that he really _had_ done so.

"Your Grace has told--has explained nothing whatever," said Gammon.

"Why, sir--I mean, what 's this horrible story you've been telling my
Lord Dreddlington about Mr. Titmouse being--in plain English, sir--A
BASTARD?"

If the duke had struck at Gammon, the latter could not have started back
more suddenly and violently than he did on hearing his Grace utter the
last words; and he remained gazing at the duke with a face full of
horror and bewilderment. The spectacle which he presented arrested the
duke's increasing excitement. He stared open-mouthed at Gammon,
presently adding--"Why sir, are we both--are we all--mad? or dreaming?
or what has come to us?"

"I think," replied Gammon, a little recovering from the sort of stupor
into which the duke's words had apparently thrown him, "it is I who have
a better title than your Grace to ask the question!--I tell Lord
Dreddlington that Mr. Titmouse is a bastard! Why, I can hardly credit my
ears! Does my Lord Dreddlington say that I have told him so?"

"He does, sir!" replied the duke, fiercely.

"And what else may his Lordship have said concerning me?" inquired
Gammon, with a sort of hopeless smile.

"By Heaven, sir, you mustn't treat this matter lightly!" said the duke,
impetuously, approaching him suddenly.

"May I ask your Grace whether this is the matter mentioned in your
Grace's note, as of the"----

"It _is_, sir! it is!--and it's killed my Lord Dreddlington--and also
the Lady Cecilia!"

"What!" cried Gammon, starting and exhibiting increasing
amazement--"does _her Ladyship_, too, say that I have told her so?"

"Yes, sir; she does!"

"What, Lady Cecilia?" echoed Gammon, really confounded.

"Well, sir--I think she did"----

"_Think_, your Grace!" interrupted Gammon, bitterly and reproachfully.

"Well, sir--certainly the fact is, I may be mistaken as to _that_
matter. I was not present; but, at all events, my Lord Dreddlington
certainly says you told _him_--and he's told Lady Cecilia--and it's
killing her--it is, sir!--By heavens, sir, I expect hourly to hear of
both of their deaths!--and I beg to ask you, sir, once for all, have you
ever made any such statement to my Lord Dreddlington?"

"Not a syllable--never a breath of the sort in all my life!" replied
Gammon, boldly, and rather sharply, as if indignant at being pressed
about anything so absurd.

"What!--nothing of the sort? or to that effect?" exclaimed the duke,
with mingled amazement and incredulity.

"Certainly--certainly not!--But let me ask, in my turn, is the _fact_
so? Does your Grace mean to say that"----

"No, sir," interrupted the duke, but not speaking in his former
confident tone--"but my Lord Dreddlington does!"

"Oh, impossible! impossible!" cried Gammon, with an incredulous
air--"Only consider for one moment--how could the fact possibly be so
and I not know it! Why, I am familiar with every step of his pedigree!"
The duke drummed vehemently with his finger on the table, and stared at
Gammon with the air of a man suddenly and completely nonplussed.

"Why, Mr. Gammon, then my Lord Dreddlington must have completely lost
his senses! He declares that you told him that such was the fact!--When
and where, may I ask, did you first see him to-day?"

"About half-past eleven or twelve o'clock, when he called at my chambers
in a state of the greatest agitation and excitement, occasioned by the
announcement in this morning's paper of the sudden blow-up of the
Artificial"----

"Good Heaven! why, is _that_ gone?" interrupted his Grace, eagerly and
alarmedly, starting up from his seat--"When? why? how?--By Heaven, it's
enough to turn any one's head!"

"Indeed it is, your Grace. My Lord Dreddlington was the first from whom
I heard anything on the subject."

"It's very odd I didn't see the paragraph! Where was it? In the
_Morning Growl_?" continued the duke, with much agitation.

"It was, your Grace--it stated that Sir Sharper Bubble had suddenly
absconded, with all the funds of"----

"Oh, the villain! oh, the villain!--But why do you make such scoundrels
chairmen, and treasurers, and so forth? How must the loss be made good?
You really don't look sharp enough after people whom you put into such
situations! Who the deuce is this fellow--this Sir Bubble Sharper, or
whatever he is called--eh?"

"He was greatly respected in the City, or would not have been in the
position he was. Who could have suspected it?"

"And is the thing quite blown up? _All_ gone?"

"Yes. I fear it is, indeed!" replied Gammon, shrugging his shoulders and
sighing.

"Of course no one can be made liable--come the worst to the worst, eh?"
inquired the duke, very anxiously, "beyond the amount of his shares?
How's that, Mr. Gammon?"

"I devoutly trust not! Your Grace will observe that it depends a good
deal on the prominence which any one takes in the affair."

"Egad! is that the principle? Then, I assure you, Mr. Gammon, upon my
word of honor, that I have not taken the least public part in the
proceedings"----

"I am very happy to hear it, your Grace. Nor have I--but I very much
fear that my Lord Dreddlington may have gone farther a good deal"----

"I've several times warned him on the subject, I assure you. By the way,
there's that other affair, Mr. Gammon, I hope--eh?--that the Gunpowder
and Fresh Water"----

"Good heavens, your Grace! I hope all is right _there_--or I, for one,
am a ruined man!" replied Gammon, quickly.

"I--I--hope so too, sir.--So Lord Dreddlington was a good deal shocked,
eh, this morning?"

"Yes, indeed he was--nay, I may say, terribly excited! I was greatly
alarmed on his account, directly I saw him."

"And is this Mr. Titmouse--eh?--involved in the thing?"

"I really can't tell, your Grace--his movements are somewhat
eccentric--it's extremely difficult to discover or account for them! By
the way, I recollect, now, that I _did_ mention his name to Lord
Dreddlington."

"Ah, indeed! What about?" interrupted his Grace, briskly.

"Why, I just heard that early this morning there would be one or two
executions put into his house--he's been going on lately in a very wild
way."

"Oh, he's a monstrous little--but was that all that passed between you
and my Lord Dreddlington about him?"

"I will undertake to say," replied Gammon, pausing, putting his finger
to his lips, and appearing to try to recollect--"that that was the only
mention made of his name, for soon after his Lordship was seized with a
fit," and Mr. Gammon proceeded to give the duke a very vivid and feeling
description of it.

"What a singular hallucination his Lordship must be laboring under, to
make such an assertion concerning me as he appears to have made!"
presently observed Gammon.

"Very!" replied the duke, gravely, still feeling serious misgivings on
the subject; but what could he either say, or do, further, after the
solemn, the explicit, and repeated denials of Mr. Gammon? His Grace then
gave him an account of what he had heard as to the mode of Lord
Dreddlington's seizure, and that of Lady Cecilia; and as he went on,
Gammon quivered from head to foot--and it required all his extraordinary
powers of self-command to conceal his excessive agitation from the duke.

"By the way, where is Mr. Titmouse?" inquired the duke, as he rose,
after saying that he was going on immediately to Grosvenor Square. "I
have sent to Park Lane, and find that he has not been there since the
morning."

"I really don't know, I assure your Grace. I have not seen him for
several days. If his affairs are as seriously involved as your Grace
would intimate, he may probably be keeping out of the way!"

"Do let me beg of you to take the trouble of inquiring after him
to-morrow morning, Mr. Gammon. He must be very much shocked to hear of
the lamentable condition of Lady Cecilia!"

"Indeed I will, I assure your Grace: I only hope he may not have gone
over to the Continent."

"God bless my soul, but I hope not!" interrupted the duke, earnestly:
and added, after one or two other observations, "then I understand you
as stating, Mr. Gammon, that there is not the least pretence or
foundation, in point of fact, for the representation which my Lord
Dreddlington has made concerning you, with reference to Mr.
Titmouse--excuse me--is it so, upon your word of honor?"

"Upon my sacred word of honor!" replied Gammon, steadfastly; and,
shortly afterwards, bowing to the duke, took his leave, promising to
call on his Grace early on the morrow, and to make every exertion to see
Mr. Titmouse--whom Mr. Gammon was now, indeed, devouringly anxious to
see, and would have made almost any sacrifice to be enabled to fall in
with him that very night. Good heavens! how much now depended on
Titmouse!--on the manner in which he would deal with such questions as
would infallibly be asked of him by the duke, and by any one else who
might have heard of the rumor! In short, Gammon was quite distracted by
doubts and fears, as he bent his way back to his chambers, not
venturing, after what he had heard, to call in Grosvenor Square that
evening, lest he should hear fatal news of either the earl or Lady
Cecilia--that is, of either or both of his _victims_! The next morning,
the following announcement of the earl's illness appeared in most of the
morning papers, and created quite a sensation in "society:"--

     "SUDDEN AND ALARMING ILLNESS OF THE EARL OF DREDDLINGTON AND LADY
     CECILIA TITMOUSE.--Yesterday, while sitting in the office of his
     solicitor, the Earl of Dreddlington experienced an apoplectic
     seizure of a most serious nature, and which, but for prompt and
     decisive medical treatment, must have proved immediately fatal.
     His Lordship rallied sufficiently during the course of the day
     to admit of his being conveyed to his house in Grosvenor Square,
     but in the evening experienced a second and still more alarming
     fit, and continues in a state which is calculated to excite the
     greatest apprehension. We regret also to add, that Lady Cecilia
     Titmouse, his Lordship's only daughter, happening to be with his
     Lordship at the moment of this sudden attack, was immediately
     seized with illness; which, in her Ladyship's critical state of
     health, may be attended with most serious consequences."

In the evening papers, it was stated that the Earl of Dreddlington still
continued in a precarious condition, and that Lady Cecilia was not
expected to survive the night; and the instant that Mr. Gammon laid his
hands on the next morning's paper, he turned with eagerness and
trepidation to a certain gloomy corner of it--and a faint momentary mist
came over his eyes, while he read as follows:--

     "Yesterday, in Grosvenor Square, in her 29th year, after giving
     premature birth to a son, still-born, Lady Cecilia Titmouse, the
     Lady of Tittlebat Titmouse, Esq., M. P., and only daughter and
     heiress of the Right Honorable the Earl of Dreddlington."

Mr. Gammon laid down the paper, and for some moments felt overcome with
a deadly faintness. Having, however, recovered himself a little, on
casting a hasty apprehensive glance over the newspaper, for intelligence
of the Earl of Dreddlington, he read as follows:--

     "The Earl of Dreddlington, we regret to say, continues alarmingly
     ill. Drs. Bailey and Whittington are in constant attendance upon
     his Lordship. Our readers will see, in another part of our paper,
     the melancholy announcement of the death of his Lordship's lovely
     and accomplished daughter, Lady Cecilia Titmouse, after giving
     premature birth to a son, still-born. We regret to hear it
     rumored, that the illness of his Lordship originated in a shock
     occasioned by circumstances of a very painful nature; but this
     report, we trust, will turn out to be unfounded. In the event of
     his Lordship's demise, he is succeeded in his titles and estates by
     his son-in-law, and heir, upon the death of the Lady Cecilia, Mr.
     Titmouse, M. P. for Yatton."

       *       *       *       *       *

It will surely be a relief to one's feelings to pass away, for a while
at least, from the contemplation of these events of untoward and
disastrous issue, to persons and to incidents of a very different
character. Turn, therefore, kind and patient reader! your eye to that
retreat of long-suffering virtue which is to be found in Vivian Street!

Relieved from the _immediate_ pressure which had, as it were, forced him
down into the very dust, poor Aubrey's pious and well-disciplined mind
was not long in recovering that tone of confident reliance upon the
goodness and mercy of God, which God had seen fit so severely to try;
and such He now permitted Aubrey to see had been His object. He and his
lovely--his beloved wife and sister, soon recovered a considerable
measure of composure, and even cheerfulness; yet felt they all _in the
deep waters_. The generous and timely interference of Mr. Runnington had
secured them, indeed, a few months' respite from the harassing and
tormenting attacks of those who seemed bent upon their destruction; but
what was to become of them all, when the arrival of the next term should
have again set into motion against them the dismal machinery of the law?
None of them could foresee any mode of exit from their troubles;
speculation was idle: yet lost they not an humble but trembling hope,
that Providence would yet make a way for their escape.

The one of all the recent occurrences which had most shocked and
disheartened Mr. Aubrey, and driven him nearest to the verge of
downright despair, was that of Lady Stratton's death, and its afflicting
concomitants. How powerfully and perseveringly did the Arch-enemy of
mankind represent this circumstance to him--especially in those moods of
depression which are incident to all of us in this fluctuating scene of
trial and suffering--as proof that he was the sport of chance, the
victim of evil destiny! What--it was suggested--had he, his wife, his
sister, done to _deserve_ it? But, thank God! in vain were these
suggestions from beneath; totally ineffectual

    "To shake his trust in God!"

Certainly, the event alluded to baffled all his calculations long, and
deeply, and anxiously as he reflected upon it, in all its bearings--and
his only refuge lay in the simple reference of it to the all-wise
providence of God. Oh, foolish fiend! and didst thou really think this
little matter was sufficient to make this Christian man doubt or deny
God's moral government of the world?--Far otherwise, indeed, was it with
him, enlightened by intelligence from on high; and which satisfied
Aubrey, that while there was so much that was utterly incomprehensible
and inexplicable in the character of God Himself, in His physical and
natural government of the world, it was but reasonable to expect
corresponding mystery and incomprehensibility in His _moral_ government
of the world. We are permitted to obtain a few occasional glimpses of
the one, as well as of the other--and they should satisfy us of the
reality of the sublime and awful system which is in existence around us.
What know we of the ultimate scope and end of His working? What seeming
good shall we be sure will not produce evil? What seeming evil shall we
be sure will not produce, and is not designed to produce, good? And may
not our ignorance in these respects be specially ordained to test the
faith of man--to check presumptuous confidence--to repel palsying
despair; in a word, to make man _walk humbly with his God_, in constant
and implicit dependence upon him? Oh, blessed is the man of true
devoutness of mind, and protected from innumerable troubles and perils
that assail and overpower those who choose to live _without God in the
world_!--Thus was it that Aubrey, as he had not presumed in his
prosperity, so despaired not in his adversity.

He had commenced a sedulous attendance at the chambers of Mr. Mansfield,
within a few days after the delicate kindness of Mr. Runnington had
afforded him the means of doing so. He already knew sufficient to give
him an interest in the intricate system of the law of real property; and
the immediate practical operation of its principles, which he witnessed
in his new scene of study, served to enhance his estimate of its
importance and value. In addition, however, to his absorbing
professional labors, he continued his occasional contributions to
substantial literature; but Mr. Runnington's generosity had enabled him
to dispense with that severe and incessant exertion to which he had been
till then accustomed, and to address himself to his difficult yet
delightful studies, with undivided energy.

Some short time after he had commenced his attendance at Mr. Mansfield's
chambers, Mr. Aubrey was, one morning about ten o'clock, on his way down
to Lincoln's Inn, and when about to cross Piccadilly, paused to let pass
him a dusty post-chaise and four, dashing up St. James's Street; and as
it went close and rapidly by him, he quite started with astonishment;
for, unless his eyes had extraordinarily deceived him, he had seen in
that chaise no other a person than Lord De la Zouch: who, however, if
it _were_ he, had not appeared to see Mr. Aubrey, and probably had
really not observed him.

"Why, how can this be?" thought Aubrey, standing and gazing for a moment
in astonishment after the dust-covered vehicle. "The letter which Agnes
received the other day from Lady De la Zouch, did not say a word about
Lord De la Zouch's intention to return to England! And alone!--And in a
post-chaise--and travelling all night, as he evidently has, from Dover!
'T is strange! What can be the matter?"--And he stood for a moment
irresolute whether or not he should retrace his steps, and satisfy his
curiosity by calling at the house of Lord De la Zouch, in Dover Street.
On consideration, however, he determined not to do so. He might be
mistaken; but if not, Lord De la Zouch might have been called back to
England on a matter of special urgency, and possibly deem a visit from
any one, except those whom he expected to see, intrusive. Aubrey,
therefore, continued his way on to Lincoln's Inn; and was very soon
engrossed with the matters there requiring his attention. But it really
was Lord De la Zouch whom he had seen; and, moreover, it was solely on
Aubrey's own account that his Lordship, leaving Lady De la Zouch at
Paris, had taken this sudden journey to England--not intending Aubrey,
however, at all events at present, to be apprised of the fact. 'Twas
entirely owing to the unconscious Gammon that Lord De la Zouch thus made
his appearance in England; for, had that gentleman not taken such
special pains to have inserted in the _Morning Growl_, the full and
accurate account of the proceedings which he had caused to be instituted
against himself, which the reader has had laid before him, and which his
Lordship, in due course, had read at Paris, with infinite anxiety and
alarm on the score of its possible bearing upon Mr. Aubrey, his
Lordship would in all probability have continued at Paris for several
months longer, in total ignorance of the thraldom of the unfortunate
Aubreys. The moment that his Lordship had perused the report in
question, he wrote off to Mr. Runnington a strictly confidential letter,
begging an immediate answer, with as full and exact an account of Mr.
Aubrey's circumstances as Mr. Runnington could give. By the very next
post, that gentleman wrote off to his Lordship a long answer,
acquainting him with what had befallen the persecuted Aubrey, viz.--his
double arrest, and in respect of so terrible a liability. Mr. Runnington
spoke in very glowing and feeling terms of the manly fortitude of Mr.
Aubrey under his accumulated misfortunes; and, in short, drew so moving
a picture of the deplorable circumstances into which Mr. Aubrey and his
family were plunged, that his Lordship the next day wrote off to inform
Mr. Runnington, in confidence, that he might expect to see his Lordship
in London within a day or two--for that he was coming over solely on the
affairs of the Aubreys--and was, in fact, resolved upon bringing about,
cost what it might, either alone, or in conjunction with such other
friends of Mr. Aubrey as his Lordship might think proper to take into
his counsels, a complete and final settlement of Mr. Aubrey's affairs,
and so place him at once and forever out of the reach of all his
enemies; to set him once more straight and free in the world, and give
him a fair chance of securing, by the successful practice of the
profession of the bar, that independence, affluence, and distinction, to
which his great talents, learning, industry, and unconquerable energy,
warranted him in aspiring. As soon as his Lordship had recovered from
the fatigues of his journey, he sent off a servant to request the
immediate attendance of Mr. Runnington--who was overjoyed at receiving
the summons, and could hardly refrain from stepping over to Mr.
Mansfield's, in order to apprise Mr. Aubrey of the arrival of Lord De la
Zouch. He abstained, however, from doing so, on recollecting the strict
injunctions of Lord De la Zouch; and immediately set off for Dover
Street. But before they met, let me take the opportunity of mentioning
one or two little matters connected with the previous movements of Mr.
Runnington.

He was a very able man; clear-headed, cautious, experienced, and
singularly prompt and determined, when once he had resolved on any
course of proceeding: in short, he was quite capable of contending
against even such a formidable opponent as Gammon, subtle, tortuous, and
unscrupulous though he might be. "Let me once _get hold_ of Master
Gammon--that's all!"--thought, very frequently, Mr. Runnington. Now, the
astounding avowal which Miss Aubrey represented Mr. Gammon as having
made to her, in his insane attempt to prevail upon her to entertain his
addresses--viz. that he possessed the power of immediately, and by legal
means, displacing Mr. Titmouse, and repossessing Mr. Aubrey, of
Yatton--had made a profound impression on the mind of Mr. Runnington.
The more that he reflected upon the incident--and upon the character of
Mr. Gammon, the stronger became his conviction that Mr. Gammon had been
in earnest in what he had said; that there was a foundation in fact for
his assertion; and that if so, some scheme of profound and infernal
wickedness must have been had recourse to, in order to dispossess Mr.
Aubrey of Yatton, and place Titmouse there in his stead. Then Mr.
Runnington adverted, in his own mind, to the circumstance of Mr.
Gammon's exercising such a constant interference and control over
Titmouse, and all matters connected with Yatton. Mr. Runnington many and
many a time pondered these things in his mind--but was, after all,
completely at a loss to know what steps to take, and how to deal with
the affair, as it stood. Then again, with reference to the death of Lady
Stratton, and the melancholy circumstances attending it, Mr. Runnington
had entered into a correspondence with Mr. Parkinson, with a view to
ascertaining the chances there were, of procuring his draft of Lady
Stratton's will, to be admitted to probate; and laid the whole affair,
in the shape of a "case," before an eminent practitioner in the
ecclesiastical court. The opinion he thus obtained, was, however,
adverse; mainly, on the ground that there was clearly evidence to show a
subsequent essential alteration of intention on the part of Lady
Stratton--to say nothing of certain other difficulties which, the fee
marked being a very handsome one, were suggested by the astute civilian.
Mr. Runnington was much chagrined at this result; and abandoned his
design of seriously contesting Mr. Titmouse's claim to administration.
It could, however, he thought, do no harm if he were just to lodge a
_caveat_, even though he should there leave the matter. It might have
the effect of interposing some delay; staving off any contemplated
proceedings upon the bond which Mr. Aubrey had given to the late Lady
Stratton; and afford an opportunity for negotiation concerning the
payment of Mr. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey's shares of the property of the
intestate. This step, therefore, he took--and was by no means chagrined
at finding, some short time afterwards, that the Vulture Company were
bent on pursuing their ordinary course, in cases of policies which
rendered it worth their while, viz. not paying till they were forced to
do so:--and the Company, in their turn, were only too happy to find that
there was a chance of a protracted dispute concerning the right to the
policy. Not satisfied with this--still haunted by Mr. Gammon's
mysterious statement to Miss Aubrey--it all at once occurred to Mr.
Runnington, in the course of one of his many meditations upon the
subject, to take an opportunity of discussing the affair, in all its
bearings, with Sir Charles Wolstenholme, whose penetrating, practical
sagacity, sharpened by his zeal and sympathy, might hit upon something
or other undiscernible to Mr. Runnington. Without having intimated his
intentions to Mr. Aubrey, Mr. Runnington, shortly after having lodged
his caveat, succeeded in obtaining an interview with Sir Charles,
expressly with a view of talking over the affairs of the unfortunate Mr.
Aubrey.

"God bless my soul!" cried Sir Charles, in a tone of wonder, as soon as
Mr. Runnington had mentioned the statement of Mr. Gammon to Miss Aubrey,
and the circumstances accompanying it. In short, it was clear that Sir
Charles was every whit as much struck with the fact as had been Mr.
Runnington; and for some minutes after Mr. Runnington had named it,
seemed lost in thought. A considerable pause here ensued in their
conversation; and Mr. Runnington was quite delighted to see his
distinguished companion evidently engaged in turning about the facts of
the case in his clear and powerful understanding; viewing them from
every point in which they could be contemplated, and in all their
bearings.

"It's very likely, I am disposed to think, that the fellow was in
earnest," at length said Sir Charles; "at all events that he _believed_
he had the power which he professed to possess; and that he was hurried
away into prematurely disclosing it. Egad, he's a nice person, that
Gammon, too, by the way, to think of his proposing to sweet, pretty Miss
Aubrey--ah, hah," he added with a faint but contemptuous smile; and
presently subjoined in a musing sort of way--"I've got the general facts
that came out at the trial still pretty fresh in my mind, and I've been
just running over the links in his chain of proof. 'Gad! we could
hardly have failed to detect a hitch, if there had been one! Link by
link we went over it--and were long enough about it, at any rate! I can
conceive too, that in a case of that sort there was room for a little
bit of perjury, if it were cleverly managed; and Mr. Gammon _is_ a
_clever_ man! By the way, I'm actually going down special for him to
York, in that bribery case, ah, hah! Ay," he presently resumed, "I
suspect that one or two of the links in that chain of his must have been
of base metal. Devil take him! he must have done it well, too!" He
smiled bitterly.

"If _that's_ your impression, Sir Charles," said Mr. Runnington,
eagerly, "what do you think of having a shot at them--a second
ejectment!"

"Oh, by Heaven! _that's_ an awful affair!" replied Sir Charles, shaking
his head, and looking very serious; "besides, what he's done once, he
may do again."

"Ah, but we know all his witnesses now beforehand! Then we fought him in
the dark; but now"----

"Ay, there's something in _that_, certainly," said Sir Charles,
musingly; "but then 't is such a frightful expense; and where poor
Aubrey's to get the means"----

"Oh, never mind that, Sir Charles!" replied Mr. Runnington, nevertheless
somewhat seriously; but thinking of Lord De la Zouch, he added rather
briskly--"If you only intimate an opinion favorable towards venturing
the experiment, I'll undertake that _funds_ shall be forthcoming."

While Mr. Runnington was saying this, Sir Charles Wolstenholme sat
leaning back in his chair, his head inclined on one side, the fingers of
one hand playing mechanically with his chin; in fact, he was deeply
engaged in thought, and Mr. Runnington did not interrupt him.

"Ah," he presently exclaimed with a sort of sigh, looking with sudden
vivacity at his companion--"I have it--I have it--I see a way out of the
wood! Well, if you can only get ammunition, it's my advice to you to
fight the battle over again--_but on quite a different field_. We'll
strike a blow in a new hemisphere!"

"Indeed, Sir Charles? What, in a court of equity?"

"Oh, pho, no!--You say you _have_ entered a caveat against the grant of
Letters of Administration?"

"Yes, certainly," replied Mr. Runnington, a little disappointed; "but,
as I explained, there's no chance of establishing a _will_."

"Never mind _that!_ Throw the will to the dogs. I'll show you a wrinkle
worth a hundred wills! Mr. and Miss Aubrey, and Titmouse, are, you know,
of course, entitled each to a third of Lady Stratton's estate, but as
Aubrey would appear to the court to be in fact insolvent, and to owe
Titmouse a much larger sum than Aubrey is entitled to, out of the
intestate's estate--the preferable right to administer is certainly that
of Titmouse. Never mind that, however. Contest his right to administer
_at all_: stand by your _caveat_--and when you are called upon to
support it, do so on the ground _that Mr. Aubrey is_ NEARER _of kin to
Lady Stratton than Titmouse_--which will make it necessary for the
fellow, you know, to set forth his pedigree with the greatest
minuteness. You will then have a commission go down to the very spot
where all the witnesses are, and those fellows, the proctors, you know,
are as keen as beagles"----

"Oh, Sir Charles, Sir Charles! I--I see it all! Oh, admirable"----

"To be sure!" continued Sir Charles, with much animation. "Their case
will be as it were laid on the rack, when the process of the
ecclesiastical court is applied to it. You have an examiner on the
spot--all secret and mysterious--proctors ferreting out all sorts of
old registers and musty documents, that _we_ should never think of. 'T
is quite in their line--births, deaths, and marriages, and everything
connected with them. By Jove! _if_ there's a flaw, you'll discover it in
_this_ way!"

"Oh, heavens!" cried Mr. Runnington, with grateful glee, "your hint is
worth thousands upon thousands of pounds"----

"If it only produce _Ten Thousand a-Year_--ah, hah!" interrupted Sir
Charles, laughing good-naturedly; and very soon afterwards Mr.
Runnington quitted his chambers, charmed and excited by the masterly
suggestion which had been made to him, and resolved to go off to his
proctor _instanter_, set about acting upon the hint forthwith, and get a
kind of general notion of the process which he thought of commencing.
You might, within an hour's time, have seen Mr. Runnington closeted with
the proctor always employed by his firm--Mr. OBADIAH POUNCE--a man whose
look told you he was made for penetrating into and poking about anything
musty, or obscure. He was, indeed, thoroughly up to his business--in
fact, not an abler or more experienced proctor was to be found in
Doctor's Commons. As Mr. Pounce was not entirely unacquainted with the
facts--having drawn up the case which had been submitted to Dr. FLARE
for his opinion as to the admissibility to probate of Mr. Parkinson's
draft of Lady Stratton's intended will--it did not take long to put him
in possession of the wishes and intentions of Mr. Runnington.

"Let us come away to Dr. Flare at once," quoth Pounce, putting his watch
into his fob--"You'll catch him at home just now, I know, and perhaps in
good-humor; and a short consultation with _him_ will be worth half a
dozen written opinions."

So they set off for the chambers of Dr. Flare, which were at only a few
yards' distance. Dr. Flare was a very great man in the ecclesiastical
court; in fact, by far the most eminent practitioner there. He was
thoroughly versed in ecclesiastical law, and every species of learning
connected with it; in fact, he had for the last thirty years been
concerned in every case of the least importance which had come before
that solemn, quaint, and mysterious tribunal. He was possessed of great
acuteness and powers of arrangement, and had wonderful industry; but his
capital quality was that of thoroughly identifying himself with his
cause. Into every cause in which he was employed, he entered with all
the keenness and vivacity which he could have displayed in one of vital
personal consequence to himself. The moment he had possessed himself of
the facts of his case, he became sincerely and really convinced, to the
end of the chapter, that he was on the right side--that the legal and
moral merits were with his client--that he ought to win--and that his
opponents were among the most execrable of mankind. But, to be sure,
such a _temper_ was his! So fierce and fiery, that it scorched everybody
who came into contact with him. He was like an angry dog, who, if he
have nothing else to snap at, will snap at his own tail--and Dr. Flare,
when he had no one else to get into a passion with, would get into one
with himself. His own quickness of perception was calculated to render
him impatient and irritable under even the clearest and briefest
statement which could be addressed to him. He was, in a manner, the
victim of his own _acumen nimium_. In spite of considerable impetuosity
of temper, he was a kind, an honorable, and high-minded man; and when
not in actual conflict, lived on very good terms with his grave and very
learned brethren. In person, he was short and spare; his slight gray
whiskers looked as if they had been calcined by his cheeks, which,
though thin, were of a florid red color; his forehead was ample; and
there was an expression about his piercing gray eye which seemed to ask
with a curse, of any one entering, "why d'ye interrupt me?" When Mr.
Pounce and Mr. Runnington entered his room--which was covered with
papers and open books--the doctor was settling, _in furore_, Articles
extending over many hundred folios, against an unhappy curate,
flourishing on forty pounds a-year in Rutlandshire, "_touching and
concerning his soul's health, and the lawful correction and reformation
of his manners and excesses_," (such was the solemn and affectionate
strain in which the reverend delinquent was addressed,) for having
refused to baptize a child by the name of "JUDAS ISCARIOT"--that being
the name desired to be given to his infant by a blasphemous little
Radical cobbler, a chattering infidel, who sought, by that means, to
evince his insane hatred of the Christian religion. Now, Dr. Flare was
himself an ardent friend of the Church, and a sincere Christian: but, by
virtue of the quality to which I have before alluded, he had brought
himself to look upon this poor clergyman as guilty of a most flagrant
piece of wickedness; and was forging, _con amore_, the bolt to be
presently levelled at so enormous an offender. But a few minutes before
their arrival, moreover, an incident had occurred to the doctor, which
had roused him into a kind of frenzy: he had been interrupted by an
applicant to be sworn to some matter or other, for which the doctor was
entitled to the usual fee of one shilling. The deponent had only
half-a-crown; so the doctor had to take out his purse, and give him the
difference, with a muttered curse; and you may guess the scene which
ensued on the deponent's presently returning, and requesting that the
sixpence which the doctor had given him might be changed, being _a bad
one_!--Mr. Runnington was prepared to go fully into his case before Dr.
Flare; but on catching sight of him, he looked so startling a contrast
to the calm and affable Sir Charles Wolstenholme--so like a hyena
squatting in his den--that his heart suddenly failed him; and after
observing, that instead of interrupting the doctor at that time, he
would immediately lay a written case before him, he and Mr. Pounce made
their escape into the open air; the former looking so relieved of
apprehension, that Mr. Pounce almost died with laughter. But it occurred
to Mr. Runnington, that, in the present stage of the business, Mr.
Pounce was just as satisfactory an adviser as Dr. Flare could be--and he
determined upon being guided by Mr. Pounce, whom he immediately
instructed to retain Dr. Flare; and then talked over the whole case in
all its bearings--the result being, that Mr. Pounce entirely
corroborated the view taken by Sir Charles Wolstenholme, and pointed out
so clearly and forcibly the peculiar advantages attending the
contemplated mode of procedure, that Mr. Runnington nearly made up his
mind on the spot, to venture on the experiment; but at all events
undertook to give his final decision within twenty-four hours' time. The
next morning, however, he received information from Mr. Pounce, which
was calculated to quicken his motions; viz. that Mr. Titmouse was
moving, and had just "_warned the caveat_,"[15] with a view to
discovering who his opponent was, and what was the ground of his
opposition. Now, this chanced to occur on the very day of Lord De la
Zouch's arrival in London; his servant calling at Mr. Runnington's
office with a note requesting his attendance in Dover Street, within a
few hours of Mr. Runnington's receiving intelligence of the movement of
Mr. Titmouse. The result of a very long and anxious discussion between
Mr. Runnington and Lord De la Zouch was, that his Lordship acquiesced in
the expediency of the course suggested to him, viz. to suspend for a
month or two carrying into effect the scheme which he had formed for
extricating Mr. Aubrey from all his liabilities--since the proceedings
about to be instituted in the ecclesiastical court might possibly render
unnecessary the very large pecuniary sacrifice contemplated by his
Lordship, by disentitling Mr. Titmouse to receive any part of the demand
which he was at present enforcing against Mr. Aubrey. His Lordship then
gave a _carte blanche_ to Mr. Runnington, and authorized him instantly
to commence, and most vigorously prosecute every measure which might be
necessary--to spare no expense or exertion--to give and take no quarter;
for Lord De la Zouch expressed the warmest indignation at the whole
conduct of Mr. Gammon--particularly his presumptuous advances towards
Miss Aubrey, and the audacious measures to which he had resorted, for
the purpose of securing her favor. His Lordship also felt, in common
with Sir Charles Wolstenholme and Mr. Runnington, that Mr. Gammon's
avowal to Miss Aubrey of his absolute control over the enjoyment of the
Yatton property, warranted the suspicion that the decisive steps about
to be taken would lead to the most important results. Thus fortified,
Mr. Runnington immediately gave instructions to Mr. Pounce to proceed:
and that person at once entered formally into battle with his brother
proctor, Mr. Quod, who was acting for Mr. Titmouse. Supposing it to be
all a very simple straightforward affair on the part of Mr. Titmouse,
Mr. Quod did not give himself any particular concern about the step
taken by Mr. Pounce, and with which he did not acquaint Mr. Gammon, till
that gentleman called to inquire in what state the proceedings were; and
when he found the ground taken by Mr. Aubrey, and that it would compel
Mr. Titmouse to prove over again every link in the chain which connected
him with the elder branch of the Aubrey family, he was not a little
agitated, though he made a great effort to conceal it, while listening
to Mr. Quod's account of the process about to be commenced. Each party,
it seemed, would have to give in to the court "_an allegation_," or
statement of the pedigree he intended to establish, and which would be
lodged at the registry. Each would then, in due course, obtain a copy of
his opponent's allegation, in order to guide him in framing his own
proof and interrogatories. A COMMISSION would then be sent, by the
court, into the county where the witnesses resided, to examine them--the
examiner being an officer of the court, a proctor--and, while thus
engaged, representing the court. This officer having been furnished by
the parties with a copy of the two allegations, the names of the
witnesses, and the interrogatories, would proceed to examine the
witnesses; but in a manner very different from any adopted by the courts
of law--viz. one by one, alone, secretly, and in the most searching and
thorough manner; and having given his or her evidence, the witness would
be formally threatened with the terrors of the ecclesiastical court, if
he or she should presume to disclose to any person, much less the
parties, the evidence which had been thus given to the examiner. When
the whole of the evidence had been in this mysterious way collected, it
would be lodged in the proper office of the court; and till the arrival
of the proper time for permitting both parties to take copies of
it--they would be in total ignorance as to the exact nature of that
which had been given by even their own witnesses. Mr. Quod added, that
the briefs which had been used at the trial of the action of ejectment,
would of themselves furnish almost the entire "allegations," and greatly
facilitate and accelerate the proceedings.

"Then, do the parties, or their proctors," inquired Gammon, "go down
beforehand to the spot where the commission is to be held?"

"Oh yes, both parties, of course--Pounce and I shall be both at work
down there, rummaging registries, records, churchyards--brushing up
every man, woman, and child, that's got a word to say on the
subject--warm work, warm work, Mr. Gammon! We sha'n't leave a stone
unturned on either side! Lord, I recollect a case, for instance, where a
_marriage_ passed muster in all your common-law courts, one after the
other; but as soon as it got into _our_ hands--aha!--we found out that
it was no marriage at all! and some thirty or forty thousand a-year
changed owners! What d'ye think of that?" said Mr. Quod, rubbing his
hands, with a pleased and confident air, which strangely contrasted with
the reserved and disconcerted manner of his companion; who, in fact, had
been thrown into a cold perspiration by what he had heard. "Pounce,"
continued Quod, "is a keen hand, but I know one that's not afraid of him
any day! But I'm sorry they've secured Dr. Flare, I own"----

"Ah, well, that can't be helped now, you know. Good-day, Mr. Quod," said
Gammon, with a sickly smile. "I shall be with you about this time
to-morrow, to make arrangements." And with this he withdrew.

"Curse Lady Stratton--her will--her policy--everything connected with
the old creature," said Gammon to himself, vehemently, as he sat that
evening alone, in his chamber, meditating upon this most unexpected turn
which the thing had taken; "nothing but vexation, and disappointment,
and _danger_, by Heaven!--attends every move I make in her accursed
affairs! Was there ever such a check, for instance, as this? Who could
have dreamed of it? What may it not lead to?" Here he got up hastily,
and walked for some minutes to and fro. "By Heaven, it won't do!--Would
to Heaven I had never ventured on the speculation of Titmouse's
administering to the old woman!--What could I have been about? And,
too, when I knew nothing about the policy! But how can I now retreat? I
_must_ go on!" Another pause. "Stay--stay--that won't do either! Oh,
no!--not for a moment! But what will they not conclude from our sudden
striking? Of course, that we dare not bring Titmouse's pedigree again
into the light; and, besides, by relinquishing the administration to
Aubrey, shall I not be putting weapons into his hands--in the possession
of the funds--against ourselves? Ay, to be sure! So, by ----, here we
are in for it, whether we will or not--and no escape!" The latter words
he uttered aloud, at the same time snapping his fingers with a desperate
air; and continued walking about for a long time in a state of most
direful perplexity and alarm. "What _shall_ I do?" said he at length
aloud, and then thought within himself--"Move in what direction I may, I
am encountered by almost insuperable difficulties! Yet how cautious have
I not been!--If I concede the administration to Aubrey, to what motives
of conscious weakness will he not refer it? I _must_ act--I dare not
hesitate to act--on the solemn finding of a jury, now deliberately
acquiesced in for so considerable a time by Aubrey. And I know that the
ecclesiastical court won't easily be brought to act against that
finding. It will never do to have to fight the question of distribution
in the Court of _Chancery_."--Here he threw himself on his sofa, and
remained absorbed in thought for some time. Again he rose, and paced his
room with folded arms. At length another view of the matter presented
itself to him. "Suppose one were to sound Aubrey or Runnington on the
subject, and tell them that I have prevailed on Titmouse to withdraw his
claim to administer--in consideration of the moral certainty there is
that Lady Stratton intended _they_ should have the whole of her
property--at all events of the amount of the policy.--Bah! _that_ won't
do! They'd never believe us! But who, in Heaven's name, is finding the
funds for such a serious contest as this?--Runnington has no doubt got
some of Aubrey's friends to come forward and make a last experiment on
his behalf. But why take this particular move?" He drew a long breath,
and every particle of color fled from his cheek. "Alas! alas! I now see
it all. Miss Aubrey has betrayed me! She has told to her brother--to
Runnington--what, in my madness, I mentioned to her! That explains all!
Yes," he exclaimed aloud in a vehement tone, "you beautiful fiend, it is
your hand that has commenced the work of destruction--as you suppose!"

Neither Lord De la Zouch nor Mr. Runnington saw any necessity for
hesitating to apprise Mr. Aubrey of the steps they meditated taking on
his behalf, as soon as they had come to the decision above recited, and
for which, of course, it became necessary to obtain his sanction. During
the course, therefore, of the day after that on which their
determination had been taken, at Lord De la Zouch's desire, Mr.
Runnington undertook to make the important communication to Mr. Aubrey.
For a while he seemed to stagger under the weight of intelligence of
such magnitude; and it was some time before he recovered calmness of
feeling sufficient to appreciate the nature and consequences of the
meditated step--viz. a direct, an immediate, and most formidable effort
to replace him in the possession of the estates from which he had been
some two years before displaced. But all other considerations were
speedily absorbed in one which most profoundly affected him--the
princely conduct of his friend Lord De la Zouch. Mr. Aubrey said scarce
anything upon this topic for some time; but Mr. Runnington perceived how
powerfully his feelings were excited. And will it occasion surprise when
I say, that this feeling of gratitude towards the creature--towards the
noble instrument--was presently itself merged into another, that of
gratitude towards God, whose mysterious and beneficent purpose
concerning him, he contemplated with a holy awe? Mr. Runnington was
himself greatly moved by the spectacle before him; but desirous of
relieving the increasing excitement under which he perceived Mr. Aubrey
laboring, he kindly turned the conversation towards the practical
details, and apprised him of the consultation which he had had with Sir
Charles Wolstenholme, to all of which Mr. Aubrey listened with intense
interest, and thoroughly appreciated the value of the admirable
suggestion upon which they were acting. But Lord De la Zouch had, with a
most delicate consideration, peremptorily enjoined Mr. Runnington not to
acquaint Mr. Aubrey with the circumstance, either of his Lordship's
having come over from France solely on his affairs, or of his meditated
project of summarily releasing Mr. Aubrey from all his embarrassments.
As soon as Mr. Runnington had informed Mr. Aubrey that he would find his
Lordship then at Dover Street, and in readiness to receive him, that
closed their interview; and Mr. Aubrey, in a state of extraordinary
exhilaration of spirits, instantly set off to see his munificent
benefactor, and pour out before him the homage of an oppressed and
grateful heart. After a long interview, the character of which the
reader may easily imagine, Lord De la Zouch insisted on setting out for
Vivian Street--for he declared he could not let another hour pass
without seeing those in whose welfare he felt so tender an interest: so
arm in arm they walked thither; and it would have made any one's heart
thrill with satisfaction to see the brightened countenance of poor
Aubrey, as he walked along, full of joyful excitement, which was visible
even in the elasticity and vigor of his step. It seemed as though a
millstone had been taken from his neck; for though he was, indeed, of a
somewhat sanguine temperament, yet had he not, in what had happened,
solid ground to sustain the strongest and brightest hopes? Whether he
was right, or whether he was wrong, still he entertained a confidence
that it was God's good providence to which he was indebted for what had
happened--and that He would bring it to a successful issue. They agreed
together, as they neared Vivian Street, to be guided by circumstances,
in communicating or withholding information of the glorious interference
in their favor which was at that moment in active operation. Mr.
Aubrey's knock--so vastly sharper and more energetic than was his
wont--brought two fair creatures to the window in a trice--their faces
pale with apprehension; but who shall tell the agitation they
experienced on seeing Lord De la Zouch and Mr. Aubrey? 'Twas an
affecting interview; here was their princely deliverer--the very soul of
delicacy and generosity--for as such, indeed, they regarded him, though
as yet ignorant of his last noble act of munificence! His Lordship's
quick and affectionate eye detected, with much pain, on first seeing
them, the ravages of the cankering anxiety which had been so long their
lot; how much thinner were both of them, and was more especially Mr.
Aubrey, than when he had last seen them! And the mourning which they
wore for Lady Stratton made the delicate figures of Mrs. Aubrey and Kate
appear slighter than even they really were. Their countenances, also,
bore the traces of sorrow and suffering--but the _expression_ was, if
possible, lovelier than ever. The fire and spirit of Kate's blue eyes
was subdued into an exquisite expression of serenity and pensiveness;
but on the present occasion her bosom was agitated by so many
conflicting feelings--she felt conscious that her very sense of
embarrassment was a delicious one--as gave a surprising vivacity of
expression to her features. Lord De la Zouch's heart melted within him,
as he looked at them, and reflected on the sufferings through which
they had passed, and felt a delighted consciousness of the pleasure
which his appearance occasioned that virtuous but long oppressed and
harassed family, and in the scene of their graceful and honorable
poverty: and devout and earnest were his wish and his hope, that
Providence would be pleased to crown with success his interference in
their behalf. His Lordship would not be denied on one matter, upon which
he declared that he had made up his mind--that they should all of them
return with him to dinner in Dover Street;--and, to be sure, the sight
of his carriage, which he had ordered to follow him within an hour's
time, gave them to understand that he really was in earnest--and they
both hastened up to dress, oh, with what bounding hearts, and elastic
steps!--Lord De la Zouch felt, as they all sat together in his carriage,
as though he were a fond father restored to the presence of
long-afflicted children; and his courtesy was touched with an exquisite
tenderness. When they entered the spacious and lofty drawing-rooms,
which, though then wearing the deserted appearance incident to the
season, reminded them of many former hours of splendid enjoyment, they
felt a flutter of spirits, which it required no little effort to
overcome. The drawing and dining rooms struck them as quite prodigious,
from their contrast to the little apartments to which they had been so
long accustomed in Vivian Street: and several other little circumstances
revived recollections and associations of a painfully interesting
nature; but as their spirits grew more exhilarated, they felt a sense of
real enjoyment to which all of them had long been strangers. One or two
sly allusions made by his Lordship to the probable future occupants of
the house, and the more modern air they might choose, perhaps, to give
it, suddenly brought as bright a bloom into Kate's cheek, as ever had
mantled there! When they had returned home, it was impossible to think
of _bed_--all of them had so much to say, and were in so joyous an
excitement; and before they had parted for the night, Aubrey, unable any
longer to keep to himself the true source of his enjoyment, electrified
them by a frank and full disclosure of the great event of the day!

A day or two afterwards, Lord De la Zouch, having accomplished his
benevolent purposes, returned to the Continent, having pledged Mr.
Aubrey to communicate with him frequently, and particularly with
reference to the progress of the important proceedings which he had
caused to be set on foot. The splendid chance which now existed of
retrieving his former position, was not allowed by Mr. Aubrey to
interfere with his close attention to his professional studies, to which
he might yet have to look for the only source of his future subsistence;
and he continued his attendance at Mr. Mansfield's chambers with
exemplary punctuality and energy. It was not long after Lord De la
Zouch's second departure from England, that the melancholy events
occurred which have just been narrated--I mean the serious illness of
Lord Dreddlington, and the untimely death of Lady Cecilia. The Aubreys
had no other intimation of those occurrences than such as they derived
from the public papers--from which it appeared that his Lordship's
illness had occasioned the fright which had ended in so sad a
catastrophe with Lady Cecilia; and that his Lordship's illness had
originated in agitation and distress, occasioned by the failure of
extensive mercantile speculations into which he had allowed himself to
be betrayed by designing persons. In passing down Park Lane, Mr. and
Mrs. Aubrey, and Kate, saw a hatchment suspended from the house of Mr.
Titmouse; and, some short time afterwards, they saw that bereaved
gentleman himself, in the Park, driving a beautiful dark-blue cab, his
tiger and he both in mourning--which became them equally. Black greatly
alters most people's appearance; but it effected a peculiar change in
Mr. Titmouse; the fact being, however, that, desirous of exhibiting even
extra marks of respect for the memory of the dear deceased Lady Cecilia,
he had put his sandy mustaches and imperial into mourning, by carefully
dressing them with Indian ink, which gave a very touching and pensive
character indeed to his features.




CHAPTER IX.


While Mr. Pounce and Mr. Quod, after their own quaint fashion, are doing
decisive battle with each other in a remote corner of the field of
action; and while--to change the figure--Mr. Titmouse's pedigree is
being subjected to the gloomy, silent, and mysterious inquisition of the
ecclesiastical court, let us turn for a moment to contemplate a pitiable
figure, a victim of the infernal machinations of Mr. Gammon--I mean the
poor old Earl of Dreddlington. He was yet--a month after the death of
his unhappy daughter, Lady Cecilia--staggering under the awful shock
which he had experienced. Before he had been in any degree restored to
consciousness, she had been buried for nearly three weeks; and the
earliest notification to him of the melancholy occurrence, was the deep
mourning habiliments of Miss Macspleuchan, who scarcely ever quitted his
bedside. When, in a feeble and tremulous voice, he inquired as to the
cause of his daughter's death, he could get no other account of
it--either from Miss Macspleuchan, his physicians, or the Duke of
Tantallan--than that it had been occasioned by the shock of suddenly
seeing his Lordship brought home seriously ill, she being, moreover, in
a very critical state of health. When, at length, he pressed and
challenged Miss Macspleuchan upon the matter--viz. the reality of the
blighting discovery of Mr. Titmouse's illegitimacy--she resolutely
maintained that he was laboring altogether under a delusion--indeed a
double delusion; first, as to his imaginary conversation with Mr.
Gammon; and secondly, as to his supposed communication of it to Lady
Cecilia. Her heart was smitten, however, by the steadfast look of
mournful incredulity with which the earl regarded her from time to time;
and, when alone, she reproached herself in tears with the fraud she was
practising upon the desolate and broken-hearted old man. The duke,
however, seconded by the physician, was peremptory on the point,
believing that otherwise the earl's recovery was impossible; and as his
Grace invaluably joined Miss Macspleuchan in treating the mere mention
of the matter as but the figment of a disordered brain, the poor earl
was at length silenced if not convinced. He peremptorily prohibited Mr.
Titmouse, however, from entering his house--much more from appearing in
his presence; and there was little difficulty in making that gentleman
seem satisfied that the sole cause of his exclusion was his cruelty and
profligacy towards the late Lady Cecilia:--whereas, he knew all the
while, and with a sickening inward shudder, the real reason--of which he
had been apprised by Mr. Gammon. Very shortly after the earl's illness,
the Duke of Tantallan had sent for Mr. Titmouse to interrogate him upon
the subject of his Lordship's representations; but Mr. Gammon had been
beforehand with the duke, and thoroughly tutored Titmouse--dull and weak
though he was--in the part he was to play, and which Mr. Gammon had
striven to make as easy to him as possible. The little ape started with
well-feigned astonishment, indignation, and disgust, as soon as the duke
had mentioned the matter, and said very little--(such were Gammon's
peremptory injunctions)--and that little only in expression of
amazement--that any one could attach the slightest importance to the
mere wanderings of a brain disturbed by illness. 'Twas certainly a
ticklish matter, the duke felt, to press too far, or to think of
intrusting it to third parties. His Grace very naturally concluded,
that what his own superior tact and acuteness had failed in eliciting,
could be detected by no one else. He frequently pressed Mr. Gammon,
however, upon the subject; but that gentleman maintained the same calm
front he had exhibited when first questioned by the duke; giving the
same account of all he knew of Titmouse's pedigree--and clinching the
matter by sending to his Grace a copy of the brief, and of the
short-hand writer's notes of the trial--challenging, at the same time,
the most rigorous investigation into every circumstance in the case. It
was very natural for the duke, under these circumstances, to yield at
length, and feel satisfied that the whole affair rested on no other
basis than the distempered brain of his suffering kinsman. Nothing shook
his Grace more, however, than the sight of Titmouse: for he looked,
verily, one whom it was exceedingly difficult to suppose possessed of
one drop of aristocratic blood!--Miss Macspleuchan, a woman of superior
acuteness, was infinitely more difficult to satisfy upon the subject
than the duke; and though she _said_ little, her manner showed that she
was satisfied of the existence of some dreadful mystery or other,
connected with Mr. Titmouse, of which Mr. Gammon was master--and the
premature discovery of which had produced the deplorable effects upon
the earl under which he was at that moment suffering. The earl, when
alone with her, and unconscious of her presence, talked to himself
constantly in the same strain; and when conversing with her, in his
intervals of consciousness, repeated over and over again, without the
slightest variation, facts which seemed as it were to have been burned
in upon his brain. Miss Macspleuchan had--to conceal nothing from the
reader--begun to cherish very warm feelings of attachment to Mr. Gammon;
whose striking person, fascinating conversation, and flattering
attention to herself--a thing quite unusual on the part of any of the
earl's visitors--were well calculated to conduce to such a result. But
from the moment of Lord Dreddlington's having made the statement which
had been attended by such dreadful consequences, her feelings towards
Mr. Gammon had been completely chilled and alienated. Her demeanor, on
the few occasions of their meeting, was constrained and distant; her
countenance clouded with suspicion, her manners frozen with reserve and
hauteur.

Mr. Gammon's first interview with the earl, after his illness and
bereavement, had become a matter of absolute necessity--and was at his
Lordship's instance; his wishes being conveyed through the Duke of
Tantallan, who had intimated to him that it was indeed indispensable, if
only to settle some matters of business, of pressing exigency, connected
with the failure of the Artificial Rain Company. The duke was with his
noble kinsman at the time of Mr. Gammon's calling--having intended to be
present at the interview. They awaited his arrival in the earl's
library. It is very difficult to describe the feelings with which Mr.
Gammon anticipated and prepared for the appointed interview with the man
on whom he had inflicted such frightful evil, towards whom he felt that
he had acted the part of a fiend. How had he dealt with the absolute and
unrestrained confidence which the earl had reposed in him! The main prop
and pillar of the earl's existence--family pride--Gammon had snapped
asunder beneath him; and as for fortune--Gammon knew that the earl was
absolutely ruined. Not, however, that Gammon really felt any
commiseration for his victim: his anxiety was only as to how he should
extricate himself from liability in respect of it. And had not a man of
even his marble heart cause for apprehension, in approaching the earl on
that occasion, to be interrogated concerning Titmouse--to look the earl
in the face, and deny what had passed between them;--and that, too,
when the rigid investigation was pending which might, within a few short
weeks, convict and expose him to the scorn--the indignation--of society,
as a monster of fraud and falsehood?

The earl sat in his library, dressed in deep black, which hung upon his
shrunk attenuated figure, as upon an old skeleton. He looked twenty
years older than he had appeared two short months before. His hair,
white as snow, his pallid emaciated cheek, his weak and wandering eye,
and a slight tremulous motion about his head and shoulders--all showed
the mere wreck of a man that he had become, and would have shocked and
subdued the feelings of any beholder. What a contrast he presented to
the portly and commanding figure of the Duke of Tantallan, who sat
beside him, with a brow clouded by anxiety and apprehension! At
length--"Mr. Gammon, my Lord," said the servant, in a low tone, after
gently opening the door.

"Show him in," said the duke, rather nervously, adding to the earl in a
hurried whisper,--"now be calm--my dear Dreddlington--be calm--it will
be over in a few minutes' time."--The earl's lips quivered a little, his
thin white hands trembled, and his eyes were directed towards the door
with a look of most mournful apprehension, as the fiend entered. Mr.
Gammon was pale, and evidently nervous and excited; his habitual
self-command, however, would have concealed it from any but a practised
observer. What a glance was that with which he first saw the earl!--"It
gives me deep pain, my Lord," said he, in a low tone, slowly advancing
with an air of profound deference and sympathy, "to perceive that you
have been so great a sufferer."

"Will you take a chair, sir?" said the duke, pointing to one which the
servant had brought for him, and in which Gammon sat down, with a
courteous inclination towards the duke; and observing that Lord
Dreddlington's face had become suddenly flushed, while his lips moved as
if he were speaking, "You see," added his Grace, "that my Lord
Dreddlington is but slowly recovering!"--Gammon sighed, and gazed at the
earl with an expression of infinite concern.

"_Is it true, sir?_" inquired the earl, after a moment's interval of
silence--evidently with a desperate effort.

Gammon felt both of his companions eying him intently, as he answered
calmly--"Alas!--your Lordship of course alludes to that unhappy
Company"----

"Is it true, sir?" repeated the earl, altogether disregarding Gammon's
attempt at evasion.

"You cannot but be aware, Mr. Gammon, of the subject to which my Lord
Dreddlington is alluding"--said the duke, sternly, in a low tone.

"Oh!" exclaimed Gammon, with a slight shrug of his shoulders and a
sigh--"I understand that your Lordship is referring to some conversation
which you supposed has passed between your Lordship and me concerning
Mr. Titmouse!"

"Sir--sir--yes! yes!" gasped the earl, gazing at him intently.

"Well, my Lord, I have heard with inexpressible astonishment that you
suppose I told your Lordship that he was _illegitimate_."

"Ay," said the earl, with tremulous eagerness.

"Oh, my Lord, you are really laboring under as complete a delusion as
ever man"--commenced Gammon, with a melancholy smile.

"Sir--Mr. Gammon--do you believe that there is NO GOD?--that HE does not
know the--the"--interrupted the earl, but ceased, apparently overpowered
by his emotions. Gammon looked in appealing silence at the duke.

"What makes you imagine, sir, that I am bereft of reason and memory?"
presently inquired the earl, with a strength of voice and manner which
alarmed Gammon.

"I cannot account, my Lord, for the extraordinary hallucination which
seems"----

"And I suppose, sir, I am equally dreaming about the rent-charge for two
thousand a-year, which you have got on the Yatton pro"----

"Oh, pardon--pardon me, my Lord! All pure--absolute delusion and
fiction!" interrupted Gammon, with a confident smile, a look, and a tone
of voice, which would have staggered the most incredulous.

The earl raised his thin white trembling hand, and pressed it against
his forehead for a moment; and then said, turning to the duke--"He would
deny that he is now in our presence!"

"My dear Dreddlington--don't, for God's sake, excite yourself," said the
duke, anxiously; adding after a pause, "I am as persuaded as I am of my
existence, that you're under a complete delusion! Recollect your serious
illness--every one is subject to this sort of thing when he's been so
ill as you have!"

"Oh, Tantallan! Tantallan!" replied the earl, mournfully shaking his
head--"I take God to witness how this man is lying!" The duke glanced
hastily at Gammon as these words were uttered, and observed that he had
gone suddenly pale, and was in the act of rising from his chair.

"Pray, Mr. Gammon"----commenced the duke, imploringly.

"I can make very great allowance, I assure your Grace, for his
Lordship's situation--but there are bounds which I will permit no man
living, under any circumstances, to overstep with impunity," said
Gammon, calmly but resolutely--overjoyed at obtaining such a pretext for
abruptly terminating the embarrassing interview--"and unless his
Lordship chooses instantly to retract what he has said, and apologize
for it, I will never enter his presence again!"

"Oh--he had better go!" said the earl, feebly, addressing the duke,
evidently averting his face from Gammon with disgust and horror.

"Mr. Gammon, _pray_ resume your seat," said the duke,
significantly--"You are bound to regard the words as not having been
spoken."

"I thank your Grace," replied Gammon, determinedly--"but I require an
explicit retractation. I entertain a deep deference towards your Grace,
but am also aware of what is due to myself. My Lord," he added, as if at
a sudden impulse, addressing the earl, "do permit me to request your
Lordship to withdraw and apologize for"----But the earl turned his face
aside; and extending his hand towards Gammon, feebly motioned him away;
on which, with a low bow to the Duke of Tantallan, Gammon took his hat
and moved towards the door.

"Sir--Mr. Gammon--you _must_ not go," said the duke, in an earnest and
commanding manner--"you are here on business, of pressing
importance--all _this_ must pass away and be forgotten."

"_Your Grace_ I shall be most happy to attend at any time, and anywhere;
but this room I quit instantly."

"Then, sir, have the goodness to walk into the next," said the duke,
somewhat imperiously, "and I will come to you presently." Mr. Gammon
bowed and withdrew.

"Oh God! how atrocious is the conduct of that man!" said the earl, when
they were left alone.

"Really, Dreddlington, you must get rid of these--these--absurd
notions."

"Let me never see his face again!" replied the earl, feebly. "I have but
a short time to live, and that time the sight of _him_, I feel, makes
still shorter!" The duke looked both vexed and embarrassed.

"Come--come--now he's here," continued his Grace, "and on a very
important errand--let us have done with the fellow--let us have him
back, and I'll tell him you withdraw"----

"Withdraw? He _is_ withdrawn," replied the earl, confusedly.

"What d'ye mean, my dear Dreddlington? I say--let me tell him"----

"I mean, it was at his chambers, in Holborn--I pledge my honor, I
recollect as if it were yester"----

"Pho, pho!" cried the duke, rather impatiently--"it must be done! He's
come on matters of the very last importance--the thing's been put off to
the very latest moment on your account--that cursed Company!" The earl
looked up at his companion, and a faint smile flitted over his wasted
features.

"Ah--I'm now satisfied," said he, shaking his head--"that they must dig
a very great depth, indeed, before they come to the copper." The duke
looked puzzled, but said hastily, "That's right!--I'll have him back,
and you'll allow me to say it's all a mistake?"

"Certainly--I am satisfied of it."

"That will do, my dear Dreddlington!--That's the way such nonsense
_should_ be put an end to," said the duke, and, ringing the bell,
ordered the servant to request Mr. Gammon to return. After a brief
interval, that gentleman re-entered the library, but with some sternness
and reluctance of manner.

"Mr. Gammon," replied the duke, a little quickly, "my Lord Dreddlington
owns he was mistaken--he, of course, withdraws the expression--so we
had better at once to business"----

"Ay--certainly!--certainly! Have you the papers with you, Mr. Gammon?"
inquired the earl, while his trembling fingers held his gold spectacles.
Mr. Gammon bowed rather haughtily, and resuming the chair he had
quitted, drew it to the table, and opened a little packet.

"It was a ridiculous affair, I am afraid, sir," said the earl,
addressing Mr. Gammon, who felt a little surprised at the altered look
and tone of the earl.

"I fear it was extremely _unfortunate_, my Lord, in its issue," he
replied gravely, arranging his papers.

"The thing did not look so absurd _at first_, Tantallan, I assure you!"
said the earl, addressing the duke, who was eying Mr. Gammon's movements
with much anxiety; for he had come prepared to state the final result of
long negotiations between the creditors and the directors and
shareholders of the "Artificial Rain Company."

"These things never do--at first," his Grace replied with a sort of
sigh.

"Just show us, Mr. Gammon," said the earl, "if you please, the diagrams
and the sections of the strata"-----

"The _what_?" inquired the duke, turning surprisedly to the earl--so did
Mr. Gammon, and for a moment ceased arranging his papers. Both the duke
and he turned pale, and gazed in silent dismay at their companion.
Gammon felt momentarily sick at heart. It was evident that Lord
Dreddlington's mind had gently given way!--There was a smile of
indescribable weakness flickering about the mouth; the eyes were
unsteady; all sternness had vanished from his brow; and his manner was
calm, with even an approach towards cheerfulness. Gammon's face was
suddenly blanched, and he glanced with horror at the duke, who, without
removing his eyes from Lord Dreddlington, unconsciously exclaimed, "Oh
my God!"

"Is it your Lordship's pleasure"----faltered Gammon, his hands trembling
visibly.

"You are right, Tantallan," said Lord Dreddlington, as if suddenly
struck by the peculiar look with which the duke continued to regard him.
"You shall hear all; but we must be alone. Sir, you may retire, and be
in attendance another day," he added, abruptly addressing Gammon, with
all his former stateliness of manner, but with a feeble voice. Mr.
Gammon, very greatly agitated, hastily put together the documents which
he had partially arranged on the table, and with a profound bow
withdrew.

"At nine this evening--in Portman Square, sir, if you please," said the
duke, tremulously.

"I will attend your Grace," said Gammon, and with not a little
trepidation closed the door after him; on which the earl proceeded, in a
very anxious and mysterious manner, to intimate the existence of a
conspiracy on the part of the Earl of Fitzwalter and others, to prevent
his--Lord Dreddlington's--obtaining a marquisate, on the ground that he
had been connected with Sir Sharper Bubble in a swindling company; and
his Lordship had good grounds for believing that Mr. Gammon was secretly
lending his assistance to the undertaking, and his coming there that
morning with the papers relating to the intended purchase of the Isle of
Dogs, was in furtherance of his treacherous objects! The duke listened
in silent dismay to this rambling account of the imaginary conspiracy,
and had just determined upon quietly sending for Miss Macspleuchan, when
the earl abruptly paused, and after a confused stare at his companion,
pressed his hand to his forehead, and said with hesitation and
embarrassment--"Pray, Tantallan, don't think anything more about
what I have been saying! I--I--feel that I have been talking
nonsense--incoherently--Surely it must have struck _you so_? Eh,
Tantallan?"

There was something so imbecile and miserable in the look with which the
earl regarded his companion, that the duke for a moment could not reply
to him. At length, "My dear Dreddlington," said he, gently grasping his
hand, "you are at present only a little excited--you will soon recover
yourself. Let us ask Miss Macspleuchan to join us, as she is sitting all
alone up-stairs."

"Not just now, Tantallan--I feel I have wandered a little, but all is
now right again. He is gone, is he?" The duke nodded. "The sight of that
man was at first too much for me; I felt oppressed and confused, but I
thought it right to struggle against it!--He denied it all?--Is not that
enough to drive a man out of his senses?"

"My dear Dreddlington, we shall get wrong again--let us quit the
subject," said the duke, anxiously.

"No," replied the earl, languidly, "do not fear me; I feel quite myself
again! I can only repeat to you, that that man's conversation with me
about--about"--he shuddered--"as certainly happened, as the heavens are
above us!" The earl had really, at all events for the present, recovered
from the temporary confusion into which his thoughts had fallen; and
proceeded, with as much energy as his shattered condition would admit
of, to give the duke, as he had often done before, a distinct and
consistent account of all that had taken place at Mr. Gammon's
chambers:--and as he went on, it all of a sudden occurred to his Grace,
for the first time--how improbable is it that Lord Dreddlington should
have _invented_ a scene, which he has uniformly delineated in almost the
same words? What but truth and reality could enable him to preserve such
a consistency in describing a transaction with such minute
circumstantiality? Having once looked at the matter in this new light,
every succeeding moment saw him more and more satisfied that such was
the true view of it; and before he had quitted his unfortunate kinsman,
he had pretty nearly convinced himself of three things; first, that Mr.
Titmouse was a hideous little base-born miscreant and impostor;
secondly, that Mr. Gammon must be the profoundest scoundrel living; and
lastly, that it was very singular that he--the duke--had been so long in
arriving at such a conclusion. But then, it subsequently occurred to the
sagacious duke--how was he to act? What position was he to assume with
Mr. Gammon, when he came, in the evening, in obedience to his Grace's
own appointment? What reasons could he assign for his sudden change of
opinion? Nothing new had occurred: and he felt a little embarrassed,
seeing that all he should be able to say would be that he had at length
suddenly taken a different view of facts long well known! At all events,
he determined to put the brief of Mr. Titmouse's case, used at the
trials, and which Mr. Gammon had some time before forwarded to his
Grace's house, into the hands of some eminent lawyer, for a candid and
confidential opinion.

Mr. Gammon, on quitting Lord Dreddlington's house, quickly recovered
from the momentary shock which he had suffered in the earl's presence;
and--shall I record the fact?--all other feelings and all his fears were
merged in one of delight and exultation at the awful calamity which had
befallen Lord Dreddlington: no one, Mr. Gammon considered, would
thenceforth think of attaching the least importance to anything the earl
might say, or had said, but would doubtless deem it the mere creation of
a disordered brain. Then all that would be necessary, would be the
silencing Titmouse--no difficult matter, since even he could comprehend
that secrecy was to him a matter of salvation or destruction! But then,
again, like a criminal's chance glance at the hideous guillotine or
gallows in the distance--a recollection of the ecclesiastical inquiry,
at that instant in vigorous action, blanched the cheek of Mr. Gammon,
and dashed all his new hopes to the ground. If those infernal
inquisitors _should_ discover all, and thereby demonstrate Titmouse's
illegitimacy, how perfectly frightful would be the position of Mr.
Gammon! What would then avail him the insanity of Lord Dreddlington?
Would it not, on the contrary, be then attributed to the right
cause--the atrocious cruelty and villany which had been practised upon
him? How irretrievably was Gammon committed by his repeated and solemn
asseverations to Miss Macspleuchan and the Earl of Dreddlington? The
evidence which sufficed to entitle Mr. Aubrey, in preference to Mr.
Titmouse, to administer to Lady Stratton, would also suffice to entitle
him to an immediate restoration to the Yatton property! And would the
matter rest there? Would no steps be taken, in such an event, to fix
him--Gammon--as a partner, or a prime mover, in the frauds and
conspiracy by which alone, it would then be alleged, Titmouse had been
enabled to recover the property? Absorbed by these pleasant
contemplations, he was so lost to all around him, that he was within an
ace of being crushed to death under the wheels of an enormous
coal-wagon, which he had not seen approaching, as he crossed the street.
It might, perhaps, have been well had it been so--the accident would
certainly have saved him from a "_sea of troubles_," on which, for aught
we can at present see, he may be tossed for the remainder of his life.

The chief object of Mr. Gammon's interview with the Earl of
Dreddlington, had been to communicate to his Lordship information
concerning the alarming position in which he stood with reference to the
defunct Artificial Rain Company. The very prominent and active part
which his Lordship had been seduced into taking, in the patronage and
management of that Company, had naturally marked him out as the fittest
object of attack to the creditors. The Company had no Act of Parliament,
nor charter, nor deed of settlement; it was simply a huge unwieldy
_partnership_, consisting of all such persons as could be shown to be
interested, or to have held themselves out to the world as interested,
in it: and consequently, whether individually known or not, liable to
the public who had dealt with the Company, and given credit to it; on
the very obvious principle of equity, that all who would seek to share
the profits of a speculation must be responsible for its liabilities. In
the present instance, had it not been for the circumstance of there
being a considerable number of weak, inexperienced, but responsible
adventurers, who, by entering into the affair, had become liable to
share Lord Dreddlington's burden of responsibility, his Lordship must
have been totally ruined to all intents and purposes.[16] As soon as Sir
Sharper Bubble's absconding had opened the eyes of the public, and of
the shareholders, it became necessary to take instant measures for
ascertaining the exact state of affairs--and the liabilities which had
been contracted. Heavens! what a frightful array of creditors now made
their appearance against the Artificial Rain Company! It was
inconceivable how so many, and to so immense an amount, could have
arisen during the short period of the Company's being in existence; but
the fact is, that there are always thousands of persons who, as soon as
they once see individuals of undoubted responsibility fairly committed
to a speculation of this sort, will give almost unlimited credit, and
supply anything which may be ordered on behalf, or for the purposes, of
the Company. It had originated in a supposed grand discovery of our
philosophical friend, Dr. Diabolus Gander, that there were certain
modes of operating upon the atmosphere, by means of electrical agency,
which would insure an abundant supply of rain in seasons of the greatest
drought. Now, first and foremost among the creditors of the Company, was
that distinguished philosopher himself; who, to constitute himself
effectually a creditor, had cunningly declined to take any shares in the
concern!--He now claimed £1,700 for a series of "preliminary
experiments," independently of compensation for his time and services in
conducting the aforesaid experiments;--and, in order to put the question
of _liability_ beyond all doubt, the doctor had taken care, from time to
time, to invite the more distinguished and wealthy of the shareholders
to come and witness his doings--always carefully noting down their
names, and the names also of the witnesses who could prove such
attendance--the interest they took in the experiments--their expressed
good wishes for the success of the Company, &c. &c., and their repeated
acknowledgments of the uniform courtesy of the worthy doctor, who
thought no pains too great to explain the nature of his surprising
operations. Then, again, he had entered into an agreement, signed by
Lord Dreddlington, and one or two others on behalf of the Company, by
which he was appointed "permanent scientific director" for a period of
ten years, at a salary of £1,000 a-year, over and above the sums agreed
to be paid him for "collateral and supplementary services." This latter
claim, however, the doctor very generously offered to compromise, in
consideration of the exhalation of the Company, on payment of four
thousand pounds down!! Then came a demand amounting to little short of
£25,000 for an inconceivable quantity of copper wire, which had been
purchased for the purpose of being used in all the cities and towns
which chose to avail themselves of the services of the Company, in the
following way:--viz. a complete circle of electric communication was to
be obtained, by attaching wires to the summits of all the church
steeples, and it was necessary that such wires should be of considerable
strength and thickness, to prevent their being broken by birds flying
against, and perching upon them: (But Dr. Gander intimated that he had
very nearly discovered a mode of charging the wires, which would cause
any bird coming into contact with them, immediately to fall down dead.)
Then there were fearful charges for at least nine miles' length of
leaden pipes and hose, and for steam-engines, and electrical machines,
and so forth; particularly an item of eight thousand pounds for the
expenses of trying the experiment in a village in the extremity of
Cornwall, and which was very nearly completed, when the unfortunate
event occurred which occasioned the sudden break up of the Company. This
will suffice to give the uninitiated reader a glimpse of the real nature
of the liabilities incurred by those who had become partners in this
splendid undertaking. Dr. Gander got two actions commenced the very day
after the departure of Sir Sharper Bubble, against six of the principal
shareholders, in respect of his "preliminary experiments," and his
agreement for ten years' service; and writs came fluttering in almost
daily; all which occurrences rendered it necessary to take measures for
coming speedily to an amicable compromise. After very great exertions,
and attending many meetings, Mr. Gammon succeeded in provisionally
extricating Lord Dreddlington, on his paying down, within twelve months,
the sum of £18,000; the Duke of Tantallan was in for some £8,000, the
Marquis of Marmalade for £6,000: and the latter two peers made the most
solemn vows never to have anything to do again with joint-stock
companies: though it must be owned that they had been, as the phrase is,
"let off easily." But I must not disguise from the reader that the
Artificial Rain Company was not the only one with which these
distinguished individuals, together with Lord Dreddlington, had become
connected--there was the Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company, of which
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, were the solicitors--but _sufficient
for the day is the evil thereof_; and let it suffice for the present to
say, that some short time afterwards, the Duke of Tantallan, on the part
of the Earl of Dreddlington, paid down the sum of £10,000 on account of
the above-mentioned sum of £18,000, the remainder of which was to be
called for in six months' time. Mr. Gammon, however, could not think of
the possibility of the Gunpowder Company's explosion without a shudder,
on account of the dreadful extent to which Lord Dreddlington was
implicated, and from which Gammon feared that there really were no means
of extricating him. What would he have given never to have seduced the
earl into embarking into any such speculations? Nay, what would he not
have given, never to have set eyes upon either the Earl of Dreddlington
or the Lady Cecilia? What advantage had he ever gained, after all, by
his desperate grasp after aristocratic connection? If, however, the earl
should prove really and permanently insane, what a godsend would such an
event be, in every point of view, to Gammon--silencing forever the chief
sufferer and witness--and saving Gammon from all the endless vexations
and anxieties arising out of personal explanations and collisions with
the man, whom he had drawn into the vortex of pecuniary ruin--shielding
Gammon, in short, from a world of reproaches and execrations.

As for Mr. Titmouse, the _fortunate_ (!) possessor of ten thousand
a-year--as thousands, with a sigh of envy, regarded him--the uninitiated
who had an opportunity of watching his public motions, gave him credit
for feeling very deeply the melancholy bereavement which he had
sustained in the loss of the Lady Cecilia; but those more intimately
acquainted with his family circumstances, could not help remarking one
little ingredient of pleasure in his recent cup of bitterness; viz. that
as Lady Cecilia had left no offspring--no dear pledge of affection--Mr.
Titmouse was not only saved a vast deal of anxiety as to the bringing up
of the child, but had become himself heir-apparent to the barony of
Drelincourt, on the death of the Earl of Dreddlington; who, whatever
might be the effect of his whispered misfortunes in his pecuniary
speculations, had not the power, being merely tenant for life under the
entail, of injuring the fortune annexed to the title. Though Mr. Gammon
loathed the very sight, the very thought, of Titmouse, he was yet the
centre of prodigious anxiety to Gammon, who felt that he had, at all
events at present, a deep stake in the upholding, to the world, of Mr.
Titmouse's position and credit. He had been frightened by Gammon into a
state of the most abject submission to all his requirements--one of
which was, the preservation of that external decorum, when in public,
which had produced the very favorable impression already adverted to.
The other was--a vast contraction of his expenditure. Mr. Gammon
insisted upon his disposing of his house in Park Lane--which had,
indeed, been for months almost destitute of furniture, that having
fallen a prey to divers of his execution-creditors--but engaged for him
a suit of handsome furnished apartments in Chapel Street, May Fair,
allowing him the attendance of a valet, as usual; and also hiring for
him a cab, tiger, groom, and a couple of saddle-horses, with which Mr.
Titmouse contrived to make an appearance, before so much of the world as
was left in London during the autumn, suitable to his station. Some of
the more clamorous of his creditors, Mr. Gammon had contrived to pacify
by considerable payments on account, and a solemn assurance that every
one of Mr. Titmouse's debts was in train for rapid liquidation. Could
his creditors, indeed--Gammon asked--fail to see and judge for
themselves, what an altered man, in his person and habits, Mr. Titmouse
had become, since the shock he had received on the death of Lady
Cecilia? Had, indeed, he felt never so disposed to re-enter the scenes
of gay and expensive profligacy in which he had revelled so madly during
the first eighteen months after his extraordinary exaltation; there was
a serious obstacle to his doing so, in his having neglected to pay
divers heavy "debts of honor," as they are strangely called; for which
delinquencies he had twice had his nose pulled in public, and once been
horsewhipped. The gates of the sporting world were thus finally closed
against him, and thus was at least one source of profligate expenditure
shut out. Though, however, he was free to ride or drive whithersoever he
chose--and that, too, as became a man of fashion, in respect of
appearance and equipment--he felt but a prisoner at large, and dependent
entirely upon the will and pleasure of Mr. Gammon for his very means of
subsistence. Most of his evenings were spent in such of the theatres as
were open, while his nights were often passed amid scenes which were
very strange ones indeed for a young widower to be seen in! Though he
was a frequent visitor at Brookes', I must nevertheless do that
respectable club the justice of saying, that its members were not very
anxious for the presence or company of Mr. Titmouse. In fact, but for
the continued countenance afforded to him, for reasons best known to
that gentleman, by Mr. O'Gibbet, my friend would have been, some time
before, unceremoniously expelled from the club, where he had made,
certainly, one or two exceedingly disagreeable exhibitions. Liquor was
made for fools to get drunk with, and so shorten their encumbering
existence upon the earth; and as for Titmouse, I really do not think he
ever went to bed completely sober; and he avowed, that "whenever he was
alone, he felt so miserable;" and there was only one way, he said, which
he knew of to "drive dull care away." Though aware of it in point of
fact, Titmouse had neither sense nor sensibility enough to appreciate
the fearful frailty of that tenure by which he held his present
advantages of station--never reflecting that he was liable at any moment
to be precipitated down from his elevation, into far deeper obscurity
and poverty than he had ever emerged from! He had no power of enhancing
his enjoyment of the present, either by vivid contrast with the past, or
with the possible reverses of the future. A wealthy and profligate fool
is by no means the enviable person he may appear to silly lookers-on;
but what must he be when placed in the circumstances of Titmouse? He
found town, at a dull season--the fall of the year to be sure--become
daily duller, the sphere of his enjoyments having become so miserably
contracted; and Mr. Gammon more and more stern and gloomy; in fact,
Titmouse always dreaded to go near him, for he enjoined on Titmouse,
whenever they met, a circumspection which was new and intolerable. He
was refused admission at Lord Dreddlington's; the Duke of Tantallan's he
dared not go near. When, in the Park, he met the earl's chariot--a
dismal object indeed to him--driving slowly along--all in deep
mourning--the place of Lady Cecilia occupied now by Miss Macspleuchan,
and the shattered old white-haired man beside her, taking evidently no
notice of anything about him; if Titmouse caught Miss Macspleuchan's
eye, it was instantly removed, as from a disgusting object. He never met
that carriage without a shudder, and a violent one, at thought of the
frightful fraud of which he had been at first the unconscious
instrument, but to which he was now a consenting party. He had
earnestly besought Mr. Gammon to allow him to spend a few months on the
Continent, and provide him with funds to do so; but on due
consideration, Mr. Gammon refused, in the very critical conjuncture of
existing circumstances--at all events till he should have been furnished
with some clew to the course which the pending investigation was taking.
But Mr. Gammon consented to his going down to Yatton; so down he went,
but to encounter only sullen faces; servants whose wages were in arrear;
tenants whom his exactions were ruining; the friends of Mudflint and
Bloodsuck indignant at his not coming forward to rescue them from
impending destruction; and his constituency furious at the number of
bills remaining unpaid; at his total disregard of their interests in
Parliament; and his contemptible and ridiculous conduct and appearance
there, which had made them the laughing-stock of the nation. As for any
of the nobility or gentry of the neighborhood, of course their notice of
him was quite out of the question. From good little Dr. Tatham, even, he
could get nothing more than a cold and guarded civility; in fact, Mr.
Titmouse was fifty times more miserable at Yatton than he had been in
London; and, moreover, the old Hall had been completely stripped of the
handsome furniture that had been put into it on his coming into
possession, by his voracious execution-creditors; and all he could do
here to enjoy existence, was to smoke, and drink brandy and water. He
felt an impostor; that he had no right to be there; no claim to the
respect or attention of any one. Through the noble grounds of Yatton,
amid the soft melancholy sunshine of October, he walked, frightened and
alone; a falling leaf alighting on him would make him start with
apprehension, and almost drop his cigar. While such was the dreary
aspect of things at Yatton, what was the condition of Mr. Gammon in
London?

It is not possible that any one who betakes himself to tortuous modes of
effecting his purposes, and of securing the objects which a keen
ambition may have proposed to him, can be _happy_. The perpetual dread
of detection and failure, causes him to lie, as it were, ever writhing
upon a bed of torture. To feel one's self _failing_, irretrievably, in
spite of deeply-laid, desperate, and dishonorable schemes for securing
success, is sickening and miserable indeed. One in such circumstances
feels that the bitterness of disappointment will not be mitigated or
assuaged by a consciousness of the sympathy and respect of those who
have witnessed the unsuccessful attempts--a thought which is deadening
to the soul; and Gammon felt himself among the most miserable of
mankind. All other anxieties were, however, at present absorbed in
one--that concerning the issue of the inquiry then pending; and which,
as it were, darkened his spirit within him, and hung round his neck like
a millstone. If the issue of that investigation should be adverse--he
had absolutely nothing for it but instant flight from universal scorn
and execration. Of what avail would then have been all his prodigious
anxieties, sacrifices, and exertions, his deep-laid and complicated
plans and purposes? He would have irretrievably damned himself, for
what? To allow the wretch Titmouse to revel, for a season, in unbounded
luxury and profligacy! What single personal advantage had Mr. Gammon
hitherto obtained for himself, taxed to their utmost as had been his
powerful energies for the last three years? First of all, as to Miss
Aubrey, the lovely object of his intense desires--what advance had he
made towards the accomplishment of his objects after all his profound
and cruel treachery against her brother? Not a hair's-breadth. Nay, on
the contrary, the slight footing of intimacy which he had contrived, in
the first instance, to secure, he had now lost forever. Could they have
failed to perceive, in spite of all his devices, his relentless hand in
the recent persecution of Mr. Aubrey? The stern deportment of Mr.
Runnington, who had expressly prohibited Mr. Aubrey from all
communication with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, except through Mr.
Runnington himself--spoke volumes. Moreover, Mr. Gammon had chanced to
be prowling about Vivian Street on the very evening on which Lord De la
Zouch made his unexpected appearance with Mr. Aubrey, as already
described; and Gammon had seen Mr. Aubrey, Mrs. Aubrey, and Miss Aubrey,
followed by his Lordship, enter his carriage in dinner-costume; and he
thought with a violent pang of one Mr. Delamere! He had also ascertained
how suddenly his Lordship had come over from Paris--just at that crisis
in the circumstances of the Aubreys; and how probable was it, that his
Lordship's potent interference had originated the formidable proceedings
of the ecclesiastical court! And suppose the result of them should be,
to detect the imposition by means of which Titmouse had been enabled to
oust Mr. Aubrey from Yatton--what must _she_--what must they all--think
of Mr. Gammon, after his avowal to Miss Aubrey? Inevitably, that he had
either originally contrived, or, having long since discovered, was now
conniving at, the imposture! And what if she really were now all the
while engaged to the future Lord De la Zouch? And if the present Lord De
la Zouch, with his immense revenues, were resolved to bear Mr. Aubrey
through all his difficulties and troubles with a high hand? Had not
Gammon already felt the power of Lord De la Zouch in the late accursed
bribery actions? And imagining his Lordship to have been stimulated to
set on foot the pending proceedings, by the communication of Miss Aubrey
concerning Mr. Gammon's own admissions to her--was his Lordship likely
to falter in his purposes?

Look again at the financial difficulties which were thickening around
him. Between sixty and seventy thousand pounds had been already raised
on mortgage of the Yatton estates!--and not a shilling more could now be
obtained without additional and collateral security, which Gammon could
not procure. Then there was the interest payable half-yearly on these
mortgages, which alone swallowed up some £3,500 annually. In addition to
this, Titmouse was over head-and-ears in debt; and he must be supported
all the while in a manner suitable to his station; and an establishment
must be kept up at Yatton. How, with all this, was Mr. Gammon's own
dearly bought rent-charge to be realized? The already overburdened
property was totally unequal to bear this additional pressure. Again, if
his motion, which was to be made in the ensuing term for a new trial in
the case of _Wigley_ v. _Gammon_, should fail, there he was left at the
mercy of the plaintiff for a sum very considerably exceeding £3,000
(including the heavy costs,) and capable of being immediately enforced
by incarceration of his person, or seizure of his goods! Mr. Gammon,
moreover, had been unfortunate in some gambling speculations in the
funds, by which means the money he had so quickly made, had been as
quickly lost. It was true, there were the probable proceeds of the two
promissory notes now put in suit against Mr. Aubrey, and also the bond
of Lord De la Zouch himself, in all amounting to twenty thousand pounds,
with interest: but months must necessarily elapse before, even in the
ordinary course, the actions for the recovery of these sums could be
brought to a successful issue--to say nothing of any disastrous
occurrence which Gammon could just conceive the possibility of, and
which might have the effect of fatally impugning the right of action of
Mr. Titmouse. Gammon had repeatedly turned in his mind the propriety of
raising money by assignment of the bond of Lord De la Zouch, but for
several reasons had deemed it inexpedient to venture upon such a step.
For instance, the bond would be due within a month or two; and who would
advance any serious sum on so large a security, without rigorous
inquiries into the original validity of the instrument, and into the
right of the obligee to put it in suit. Supposing the issue of the
ecclesiastical inquiry to be adverse, and Titmouse's title to the Yatton
property to be destroyed; would not that at once invalidate his claims
upon the bond, and also upon the two promissory notes--at all events in
equity? Lastly, his hopes of political advancement, to which he clung
with incredible tenacity, full blooming though they had been till the
moment of his being sued for the bribery penalties, were all in danger
of being blighted forever, unless he could succeed in defeating the
verdict during the ensuing term, of which he entertained scarce any
expectation at all. But even supposing him successful there--what was to
become of him if the issue of the pending ecclesiastical proceedings
should brand him as abetting imposture of the most gross and glaring
description--nay, as being in fact its originator? Once or twice, during
his frequent agitating reviews of all these events and circumstances, he
caught, as it were, a ghastly glimpse of a sort of system of RETRIBUTION
in progress--and was able to trace evil consequences--of defeat and
misery--from every single act which he had done!

Success or failure in the ecclesiastical suit, was now in fact the pivot
upon which everything turned with Mr. Gammon--it would be either his
salvation, or his destruction; and the thought of it kept him in a state
of feverish trepidation and excitement, from morning to night--rendering
him almost wholly incapable of attending to his professional business.
He had gone down several times, accompanied by Mr. Quod, to ascertain,
as far as was practicable, the course which things were taking. Mr.
Quod was very sanguine indeed as to the issue; but, alas! Gammon had not
ventured to tell him the true state of the case: so that Quod naturally
confined himself to the substantiating of Mr. Titmouse's pedigree, as it
had been propounded, and with success, at the trial of the ejectment.
Mr. Gammon trembled at the systematic and vigorous prosecution of the
cause on the part of Mr. Aubrey; what might it not elicit? Regardless of
the consequences, he had several times tried to discover from those who
had been examined, the course of inquiry which had been pursued, and the
evidence which had been obtained from them--but in vain: some of the
witnesses were in a station of society which repelled his advances; and
others were effectually deterred from communicativeness by the
injunctions of the commissioner. Thus Mr. Gammon could ascertain
nothing--and was left to await, in fearful suspense, the legitimate
issue of this tantalizing and mysterious process, till the day when both
parties should be put in possession of all the evidence which had been
obtained.

The prospects of the Aubreys, brightened though they had been by the
sudden interference of Lord De la Zouch at the very moment of their
deepest gloom, did not disturb that calm and peaceful course of life
which they had maintained through all their troubles. Oh, how animated
and happy, however, was now that little family!--and that, not through
any overweening confidence as to the result of Lord De la Zouch's
operations on their behalf, but from a pious and cheerful persuasion
that they were not forsaken of Heaven, which had given this token of its
remembrance. The beautiful bloom began to reappear on the cheeks both of
Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, and the eye of Mr. Aubrey was no longer laden with
gloom and anxiety. He pursued the study of the law with steadfast energy
till the period of Mr. Mansfield's quitting town, and his chambers
being closed till the beginning of November. The Aubreys, poor souls!
secretly pined for a glimpse, however brief, of the pleasures of the
country; and about the middle of September, they, sure enough, received
a very pressing invitation from Lord and Lady De la Zouch, for all of
them to join them in France, by way of a total and enlivening change of
scene. Mrs. Aubrey and Kate had all but persuaded Mr. Aubrey into an
acceptance of the kind suit, when he suddenly bethought himself of what
he deemed an insuperable obstacle. It will be borne in mind that Mr.
Aubrey had given bail to a very large amount, nearly sixteen thousand
pounds, in the two actions at the suit of Mr. Titmouse, and of Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and, on inquiry, two of the friends who had
become surety for him were abroad and could not be communicated with; so
Mr. Aubrey peremptorily refused, under such circumstances, to quit the
country, though for never so brief an interval. On seriously assuring
Lord De la Zouch that there existed insuperable objections to his just
then leaving England, the ever-active kindness of his noble friend
prompted a fresh proposal,--that they should, within a week's time, all
of them, set off for a lovely residence of his Lordship's in Essex, some
fifteen miles from town, called Tunstall Priory--where they would find
everything fully prepared for their reception, and where they were
earnestly entreated to remain till they should be joined by their host
and hostess from France, about the latter end of October. 'T is quite
impossible for me to describe the exhilaration of spirits with which,
the invitation having been most gratefully accepted by Mr. Aubrey, they
all prepared for their little journey. Mr. Aubrey had made arrangements
for their going down by one of the coaches, which went within a couple
of miles of the Priory; but here again the thoughtful delicacy and
kindness of his Lordship was manifest; for the evening before they set
off, one of the servants from Dover Street came to ask at what hour they
would wish the carriage to call for them, and the van for their
luggage--such being the orders which had come from his Lordship; and
further, that the carriage was to remain at their command during the
whole of their stay at the Priory. Both Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, in their
excitement, burst into tears on hearing of this additional trait of
anxious and considerate attention. Oh! it would have cheered your heart,
good reader, to see the blithe faces, and bounding spirits, with which
that little family set off on the ensuing morning on their little
expedition. Oh! how refreshing was the country air!--how enlivening and
beautiful the country scenery amid the gentle sunlight of September!--'T
was a Paradise of a place--and as day after day glided away, they felt a
sense of the enjoyment of existence, such as they had never experienced
before!

Though it is not a very pleasant transition, the order of events
requires us to return to town, and to no very pleasant part of town,
viz. Thavies' Inn. 'T was about eight o'clock in the evening, towards
the close of October, and Mr. Gammon was walking to and fro about his
room, which was rendered sufficiently snug by the light of a lamp and
the warmth of a good fire. He himself, however, was very far from being
cheerful--he was in a state of exquisite anxiety and suspense--and might
well be; for he was at length in momentary expectation of receiving a
copy of the evidence which had been taken on the part of Mr. Aubrey, in
the ecclesiastical suit. He muttered blighting curses at the intolerable
delay of old Mr. Quod, who, Mr. Gammon felt assured, might have procured
a copy of the evidence several hours before, with only moderate
exertion. Twice had his messenger been despatched in vain; and he was
now absent on the third errand to Mr. Quod's chambers. At length Mr.
Gammon heard a heavy footstep ascending the stairs--he knew it, and,
darting to the door, opened it just as his messenger had reached the
landing with a bulky white packet under his arm, sealed, and tied with
red tape.

"Ah!--that will do. Thank you, thank you!--call to-morrow morning," said
Gammon, hastily, almost snatching the packet out of the man's hand.

"Mrs. Brown--don't let me be disturbed to-night by any one--on any
earthly consideration," said he, with feverish impetuosity, to his
laundress; and, having ordered her to close the outer door, he
re-entered his sitting-room, and with a beating heart burst open the
seals, tape, and cartridge-paper, and fastened in an instant with
devouring eyes upon the pregnant enclosure. Over page after page he
glanced with lightning speed, his breathing unconsciously accelerated
the while. When he had got to about the middle of the evidence, his
breath was for a minute suspended, while his affrighted eye travelled
down a couple of pages, which told him all--all he had feared to see,
and more--more than he had known himself. "Ah, perdition--the game is
up!" he faintly exclaimed, and, rising from his chair, threw himself
down upon the sofa, in a state of dismay and bewilderment which no words
of mine are powerful enough to describe.

Quite as much anxiety had been felt on the same subject in a different
quarter, during the whole of the day, at the Priory; where were still
the Aubreys, who had been joined a week before by Lord and Lady De la
Zouch, and by Mr. Delamere, who had come over with them from the
Continent. Mr. Runnington had written to assure Mr. Aubrey, that the
first moment of his being able to procure a copy of the evidence, he
would come down with it in a post-chaise and four. As, however, nine
o'clock elapsed without his having made his appearance, Mr. Delamere
slipped out, and without announcing his intention, ordered his groom to
have his horses in readiness instantly; and within a quarter of an
hour's time he was on his way to town, having left a hasty verbal
message, acquainting Lord and Lady De la Zouch of the object of his
sudden move. When he reached Mr. Runnington's offices, he found no one
there, to his infinite disappointment. Having slept in Dover Street, he
reappeared at Mr. Runnington's about ten o'clock the next morning, and
found a chaise and four at the door, into which Mr. Runnington, with a
large packet under his arm, was in the very act of entering, to drive
down to the Priory.

"How is it--for God's sake?" said Mr. Delamere, rushing forward to Mr.
Runnington, who was sufficiently surprised at seeing him.

"Oh, thank God! The battle's ours!"--replied Mr. Runnington, with
delighted excitement. "The murder's out!--I'll pledge my existence that
within three months' time we have them all back at Yatton!"

"You're _off_ instantly, are not you?" inquired Delamere, his face
blanched with emotion.

"To be sure--won't you come with me?" replied Mr. Runnington.

"Rattle away, my lads, and here's a guinea a-piece for you!" shouted
Delamere to the post-boys--and the next moment they were on their way,
and at indeed a rapid pace. In somewhere about an hour and a quarter's
time, the reeking horses and dusty chaise dashed up to the hall-door of
the Priory; and, as Delamere caught one or two figures standing at the
windows, he waved his hand in triumph through the chaise-window. That
brought Lord and Lady De la Zouch and Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey, breathless to
the door--out jumped Delamere, without waiting for the steps to be let
down, and, grasping the hands of all four, exclaimed with
enthusiasm--"Victory!--victory!--but where is she--?"

"Miss Aubrey's somewhere in the grounds, sir," replied a servant.

"Mr. Runnington will tell you all"--said Delamere; and springing off the
step, was out of sight in a twinkling, in quest of Miss Aubrey--burning
to be the first with the joyful news. He soon caught sight of her
graceful figure--she was standing with her back towards him, apparently
in a musing posture, gazing at the bubbling rivulet. Hearing his
bounding steps, she turned round, and started at seeing him.

"Oh, Kate, Kate!" he stammered breathlessly, "by Heaven, we've
won!"--Miss Aubrey turned very pale.

"Mr. Delamere--you--you--cannot be--I _hope_ you are not
mistaken"----said she, faintly.

"On my sacred word of honor, I have seen--I have read it all myself! 'T
is as sure as that the sun is shining--The game is up with the
villains!" Miss Aubrey made him no answer; her cheek continued white as
that of a statue; and it was absolutely necessary that he should put his
arm around her--if he had not, she would have fallen.

"Come!--Come! My sweet, my lovely Kate! Rouse yourself!" cried he, with
fond anxiety, and pressed his lips gently on her forehead--a liberty of
which she was probably not conscious, for she made no show of
resistance. Presently she heaved a deep sigh, her eyes opened, and,
finding herself entirely in his embrace, she made a slight effort to
disengage herself, but in vain. He was supporting her on one knee--for
there was no bench or seat within view. She burst into tears, and they
soon relieved her pent-up bosom of its excitement.

"Dearest--sweetest Kate--it's glorious news, and I have been too hasty
with it!" said he, excitedly.

"No--no--Mr. Delamere! I am only overpowered with joy and with
gratitude! Oh, Mr. Delamere, I could sink out of your sight!"

"Pho! my own angel!--Don't make me miserable by talking in that strain!"

"Well, what _shall_ I say?" cried she, passionately, bursting again into
tears, and turning her face from him, conscious that it was reddening.

"_Say_, Kate? That you will let me love you, and will love me in return!
Come, my own Kate! Heaven smiles on you--smile you on _me_!" She spoke
not---but sobbed, her face still averted from him.

"I know you won't say me nay, Kate, if it's only for the _news_ I've
brought you express"--said Delamere, ardently, and imprinted a
passionate kiss on her unresisting lips.

"My sweet Kate! how I have thought of you in every part of the world in
which I've been"--commenced Delamere, after having a second and a third
and a fourth time pressed his lips upon those of his beautiful and
blushing mistress; and Heaven only knows what other absurdities he might
have been guilty of, when to Kate's inconceivable embarrassment, behold,
a sudden turn brought them full in view of Lord and Lady De la Zouch and
Mr. Runnington.

"My dear, dear Miss Aubrey," cried Lord De la Zouch, "we have come to
congratulate you on this great event!" and he grasped her affectionately
by the hands, and then Lady De la Zouch embraced her future
daughter-in-law, whose cheeks burned like fire, while those of Mr.
Delamere tingled a little.

"Upon my honor, sir, you seem to have been making hay while the sun
shines," said his Lordship, in a low tone, and laughing, having left
Miss Aubrey and Lady De la Zouch together for a few moments.

"Dearest Lady De la Zouch, how did Charles bear it?" inquired Miss
Aubrey.

"He bore it with calmness, though he turned very pale; but poor Mrs.
Aubrey was very painfully excited--it was really a most affecting scene.
But she is much better now--shall we return to the house?--By the way,"
added she, slyly, "now you're _come into your fortune_, as the saying
is, Kate--I--I suppose--eh?--Geoffrey has been talking nonsense to you!"
Poor Kate blushed deeply, and burst into tears.

That was a happy--happy day; and Mr. Runnington, having been compelled
to stay to dinner, returned home at a late hour feeling already richly
repaid for all his exertions. Miss Aubrey sat up for at least a couple
of hours in her own room, writing, according to a promise she had made,
a very long letter to Dr. Tatham; in which she gave him as full an
account as she could, of the surprising and decisive event which had
just happened. 'T was quite the letter of a daughter to a fond
father--full of ardent affection, and joyous anticipations of seeing him
again; but as to the other little incident of the day, which concerned
herself personally, Kate paused--laid down her pen--resumed
it--blushed--hesitated--trembled--and at length extinguished her taper,
and retired to rest, saying to herself that she would _think_ of it, and
make up her mind by the morning.

The letter went off, however, after all, without the slightest allusion
to the possibility of its lovely writer becoming a future Lady De la
Zouch.

But it is now high time that the reader should be put into possession of
the important disclosures produced by the ecclesiastical inquiry; and we
must for a while lose sight of the happy Aubreys, and also of the
gloomy, discomfited Gammon, in order to become acquainted with the exact
state of facts which had called forth such violent and opposite
emotions.




CHAPTER X.


The reader may possibly bear in mind that Mr. Titmouse had established
his right to succeed to the Yatton property, then enjoyed by Mr. Aubrey,
by making out to the satisfaction of the jury, on the trial at York,
that he, the aforesaid Mr. Titmouse, was descended from an elder branch
of the Aubrey family; that there had existed an unsuspected female
descendant of Stephen Dreddlington, the elder brother of Geoffrey
Dreddlington, through whom Mr. Aubrey derived his claim to the
succession; and that this obscure female descendant had left issue
equally obscure and unsuspected--viz. Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse--to
whom _our_ friend Titmouse was shown to be heir-at-law. In fact, it had
been made out in open court, by clear and satisfactory evidence,
_First_, that the aforesaid Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse was the direct
descendant, through the female line, of Stephen Dreddlington;
_Secondly_, had been shown the marriage of Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse;
_Thirdly_, the birth of Tittlebat Titmouse, the first, and indeed the
only issue of that marriage. All these were not only proved, but
unquestionable facts; and from them, as far as _descent_ went, the
preferable right of Titmouse to that of Aubrey, resulted as an
inevitable inference, and the verdict went accordingly. But as soon as,
owing to the happy and invaluable suggestion of the Attorney-General, a
rigid inquiry had been instituted, _on the spot_, whence the oral and
documentary evidence had been obtained by Mr. Gammon--an inquiry
conducted by persons infinitely more familiar with such matters than
common lawyers, those acute and indefatigable inquisitors succeeded in
making the following remarkable discovery. It was found that the two old
witnesses who had been called to prove that part of the case, on the
trial, had since died--one of them very recently. But in pushing their
inquiries, one or two other old witnesses were met with who had _not_
been called by Mr. Gammon, even if he had been aware of their existence;
and one of these, an old man, while being closely interrogated upon
another matter, happened to let fall some expressions which startled the
person making minutes of the evidence; for he spoke of Mr. Titmouse's
mother under three different names, _Gubbins_, _Oakley_, and _Johnson_.
Now, the proof of the trial had been simply the marriage of Gabriel
Tittlebat Titmouse, by bans, to Janet Johnson, _spinster_. Either, then,
both the witnesses must be mistaken as to her having had other names, or
there must be some strange mystery at the bottom of it--and so it at
length turned out. This woman's maiden name had been Gubbins; then she
had married a rope-maker, of the name of Oakley, in Staffordshire, but
had separated from him, after two or three years' quarrelsome
cohabitation, and gone into Yorkshire, where she had resided for some
time with an aunt--in fact, no other person than old Blind Bess! She had
subsequently become acquainted with Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse; and to
conceal the fact of her previous marriage--her husband being alive at
the time--she was married to Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse under the name
of "_Johnson_." Two years afterwards, this exemplary female died,
leaving an only child, Tittlebat Titmouse. Shortly afterwards his father
came up to London, bringing with him his little son--and some five years
subsequently died, leaving one or two hundred pounds behind him for the
bringing up of Tittlebat decently--a duty undertaken by a distant
relative of his father, and who had been dead some years. Of course,
Titmouse, at the time when he was first presented to the reader, knew no
more than did the dead of his being in any way connected with the
distinguished family of the Aubreys in Yorkshire; nor of the very
unpleasant circumstances attending his mother's marriage, with which the
reader has just been made acquainted. Nothing can be easier than to
conceive how Mr. Gammon might have been able, even if acquainted with
the true state of the facts, to produce an impregnable case in court, by
calling, with judgment, only that evidence which was requisite to show
the marriage of Titmouse's father with Janet Johnson--viz. an examined
copy of an entry in the parish register of Grilston; of the fact of the
marriage under the names specified; and some other slight evidence of
the identity of the parties. How was the Attorney-General, or any one
advising him, to have got at the mystery attending the name of
"Johnson," in the absence of suspicion pointed precisely at that
circumstance? The defendant in an action of ejectment is necessarily in
a great measure in the dark as to the evidence which will be adduced
against him, and must fight it as it is presented to him in court; and
the plaintiff's attorney is generally better advised than to bring into
court witnesses who may be able, if pressed, to disclose more than is
necessary or desirable!

The way in which Mr. Gammon became acquainted with the true state of the
matter, was singular. While engaged in obtaining and arranging the
evidence in support of the plaintiff's case, under the guidance of Mr.
Lynx's opinion, Mr. Gammon stumbled upon a witness who dropped one or
two expressions, which suddenly reminded him of two little documents
which had been some time before put into his possession without his
having then attached the least importance to them. He was so disturbed
at the coincidence, that he returned to town that very night to inspect
the papers in question. They had been obtained by Snap from old Blind
Bess: in fact, (_inter nos_,) he had purloined them from her on one of
the occasions of his being with her in the manner long ago described,
having found them in an old Bible which was in a still older canvas bag;
and they consisted of, first, a letter from one James Oakley to his
wife, informing her that he was dying, and that, having heard she was
living with another man, he exhorted her to leave her wicked courses
before _she_ died; secondly, a letter from one Gabriel Tittlebat
Titmouse to his wife, reproaching her with drunkenness and loose
conduct, and saying that she knew as well as he did, that he could
transport her any day he liked;[17] therefore she had better mind what
she was about. This letter was written in the county jail, whither he
had been sent for some offence against the game-laws. Old Blind Bess had
been very feeble when her niece came to live with her; and, though aware
of her profligate conduct, had never dreamed of the connection between
the great family at the Hall and her niece's child. These were the two
documents which Mr. Titmouse had destroyed, on Gammon's having intrusted
them for a moment into his hands!--Though I do not attach so much
importance to them as Mr. Gammon did--since I cannot see how they could
have been made available evidence for any purpose contemplated by
Gammon--I am not surprised at _his_ having done so. They were infinitely
too dangerous documents to admit of his taking the opinion of counsel
upon; he therefore kept them entirely to himself, as also the discovery
to which they led, not trusting his secret, even to either of his
partners. Before the case had come into court, Mr. Gammon had been in
possession of the facts now laid for the first time before the
reader--contemplating, even then, the use to be thereafter made of the
prodigious power he should have become possessed of, in aid of his own
personal advancement. Thus was Titmouse base-born indeed--in fact,
doubly illegitimate; for, first, his mother had been guilty of bigamy in
marrying his father; and, secondly, even had that not been so, her
marrying under a false name[18] had been sufficient to make the marriage
utterly void, and equally of course to bastardize her issue.

Such, then, was the damning discovery effected by the ecclesiastical
commission, and which would by-and-by blazon to the whole world the
astounding fact, that this doubly base-born little wretch had been
enabled, by the profound machinations of Mr. Gammon, not only to deprive
Mr. Aubrey of the Yatton estates, but also to intermarry with the Lady
Cecilia, the last of the direct line of the noble Dreddlingtons and
Drelincourts--to defile the blood, and blight the honor, of perhaps the
oldest and the proudest of the nobility of England. Upon Mr. Gammon, it
lit like a thunderbolt. For many hours he seemed to have been utterly
crushed and blasted by it. His faculties appeared paralyzed. He was
totally incapable of realizing his position--of contemplating the
prodigious and appalling consequences which must inevitably and almost
immediately ensue upon this discovery of his secret. He lay upon the
sofa the whole night without closing his eyes, or having moved a muscle
since he had thrown himself down upon it. His laundress came in with his
bed-candle, trimmed the lamp, stirred the fire, and withdrew, supposing
him asleep. The fire went out--then the lamp--and when, about eight
o'clock the next morning, his laundress reappeared, he still lay on the
sofa; and a glimpse of his pale and haggard face alarmed her greatly,
and she went for a medical man before he was aware of her having done
so. On her returning, and informing him of what she had done, it roused
him from his lethargy, and, starting from the sofa, he desired her to
go back and request the medical man not to come, as it was unnecessary.
Heaving profound sighs, he proceeded to his dressing-room, got through
his toilet, and then sat down to the breakfast-table, and for the first
time made a very powerful effort to address his thoughts steadily to the
awful nature of the emergency into which he was driven. Mr. Quod soon
after made his appearance.

"This is a _very--very--ugly business_, Mr. Gammon!" quoth he, with a
gloomy countenance. "I look upon it there's an end to the suit--eh?"

"It is not likely that we shall stir further, certainly," replied Mr.
Gammon, with a desperate effort to speak calmly: then there was a pause.

"And I should think the matter can't end _here_," presently added Mr.
Quod. "With such evidence as this, of course they'll attack Yatton!"

"Then I am prepared to resist them," said Gammon; convinced in his own
mind that the sole object of Mr. Quod's visit was to see after the
payment of his bill--a reasonable anxiety, surely, considering the
untoward issue of the proceedings.

"How could all this have escaped _me_, in getting up the case for the
trial?" said Gammon, after a while, darting an anxious and furtive
glance at his companion.

"Ay--I hope this will teach you common-law fellows that there's a trick
or two worth knowing at Doctor's Commons!" replied Mr. Quod. "D'ye
remember what I told you at starting?--How was it, d'ye say, you
couldn't find it out? No one could, till we did!--But, by the way, do we
fight anymore in the cause? Because we must decide at once--it's no use,
I should say, going to the expense of a hearing"----

"I will give you an answer in the course of the day, Mr. Quod," replied
Gammon, with an air of repressed fury; and succeeded in getting rid of
his matter-of-fact but anxious visitor for the present; and then
reperused the whole of the evidence, and considered within himself, as
well as he was able, what course he ought to pursue. He had need, truly,
to do so; for he very shortly found that he had to deal with an enemy in
Mr. Runnington--uncompromising and unrelenting--whose movements were
equally prompt, vigorous, and skilful. That gentleman, following up his
blow, and acting under the advice of Sir Charles Wolstenholme, who had
just returned to town for the commencement of the legal year--viz.
Michaelmas Term--first of all gave notice, through Mr. Pounce, of his
intention to proceed with the suit for administration; but found that
the enemy in that quarter had struck; Mr. Quod formally notified his
abandonment of opposition on the part of Mr. Titmouse. So far so good.
Mr. Runnington's next step was to go down into Staffordshire and
Yorkshire, accompanied by Mr. Pounce, and by his own experienced
confidential clerk, in order to ascertain still more distinctly and
conclusively the nature of the evidence which was in existence
impeaching the legitimacy of Mr. Titmouse. His inquiries were so
satisfactory, that, within a week of his return to town, he had caused
an action of ejectment to be brought for the recovery of the whole of
the Yatton property; and copies of the "Declaration" to be served on Mr.
Titmouse, and on every tenant in possession upon the estate. Then he
served notices on them, calling upon each and every one of them not to
pay rent in future to any one except Charles Aubrey, Esquire, or his
agents by him lawfully appointed; and caused a formal demand of the
title-deeds of the estate to be forthwith made upon Mr. Titmouse,
Messrs. Bloodsuck and Son, and Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and also
advertisements to be inserted in the newspapers, to caution all persons
against advancing money on mortgage or on other security of the Yatton
property, "formerly in possession of, and now claimed by, Charles
Aubrey, Esq., but at present wrongfully held by Tittlebat Titmouse,
Esq., M.P., and for the recovery of which an action of ejectment has
been commenced, and is now pending;" and also from advancing money "on
the faith or security of a certain bond conditioned in the penalty of
£20,000 for the payment to Tittlebat Titmouse of £10,000, with interest,
on or before the 24th day of January next, and dated the 26th July,
18--, and signed by Lord De la Zouch and Charles Aubrey, Esq., the same
having been obtained by undue means, and on a false and fraudulent
pretence of money being due from the said Charles Aubrey, Esq., to the
aforesaid Tittlebat Titmouse." These advertisements, and certain
paragraphs relating to the same matter, which found their way into the
newspapers, to the consternation of Gammon, came under the eye of the
Duke of Tantallan, and struck him dumb with dismay and horror at so
decisive and public a corroboration of his worst fears. A similar effect
they produced upon Miss Macspleuchan, who, however, succeeded in keeping
them for some time from the observation of the unfortunate Earl of
Dreddlington. But there were certain other persons in whom these
announcements produced an amazing degree of consternation; viz. three
Jewish gentlemen, MORDECAI GRIPE, MEPHIBOSHETH MAHAR-SHALAL-HASH-BAZ,
and ISRAEL FANG, who were at present the depositaries of Mr. Titmouse's
title-deeds, with a lien upon them, as they had fondly imagined, to the
extent of nearly seventy thousand pounds--that being the amount of money
they had advanced, in hard cash, to Mr. Titmouse, upon mortgage of his
Yatton estates. The last of these unfortunate gentlemen--old Mr.
Fang--had advanced no less a sum than twenty thousand pounds. He had
been the first applied to, and had most fortunately taken a collateral
security for the whole sum advanced; viz. a bond--the bond of our old
friend, "THOMAS TAG-RAG, draper and mercer, of No. 375 Oxford Street,
and Satin Lodge, Clapham, in the county of Surrey." As soon as ever the
dismayed Israelite, by his attorney, had ascertained, by inquiry at the
office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--where all was confusion--that
there really was a claim set up to the whole of the estates, on behalf
of him who had been so recently and suddenly dispossessed of them, he
exclaimed in an ecstasy, "Oh, ma Got! oh, ma _dear_ Got! Shoo Tag-rag!
Shoo on the bond! Looshe no time"----and he was obeyed. Terrible to
tell, two big bum-bailiffs the next day walked straight into the shop of
Mr. Tag-rag, who was sitting in his little closet at the farther end,
with his pen in his hand, busily checking some bills just made out, and
without the least ceremony or hesitation hauled him off, hardly giving
him time to put his hat on, but gruffly uttering in his ear some such
astounding words as "Thirty thousand pounds!" He resisted desperately,
shouting out for help; on which all the young men jumped over the
counters, and seemed to be coming to the rescue! while one or two female
customers rushed affrighted into the street. In short, there was a
perfect panic in the shop; though the young men merely crowded round,
and clamored loudly, without venturing upon a conflict with the two
burly myrmidons of the law, who clapped their prize into a coach
standing opposite--Mr. Tag-rag frothing at the mouth, and with
impassioned gesticulation, protesting that he would have them both
transported to Botany Bay on the morrow. They laughed at him
good-humoredly, and in due time deposited him safely in the lock-up of
Mr. Vice, who, on seeing that he was disposed to be troublesome, thrust
him unceremoniously into the large room in which, it may be recollected,
Mr. Aubrey had been for a few minutes incarcerated, and left him,
telling him he might write to his attorney. There he continued for a
long while in a state bordering on frenzy. Indeed, he must have fancied
that the devil had made it, just then, his particular business to worry
and ruin _him_; for what do you think had happened to him only two days
before? an event which had convulsed Clapham to its centre--so much, at
least, of Clapham as knew of the existence of the Tag-rags and the
Reverend Dismal Horror, his chapel and congregation. That young shepherd
of faithful souls having long cherished feelings of ardent fondness
towards one gentle lamb in his flock in particular--viz. Tabitha
Tag-rag--who was the only child of the wealthiest member of his little
church--took upon himself to lead her, nothing loath, a very long and
pleasant ramble--in plain English, Mr. Dismal Horror had eloped with the
daughter of his head deacon--to the infinite scandal and disgust of his
congregation, who forthwith met and deposed him from his pulpit; after
which his father-in-law solemnly made his will, bequeathing everything
he had to a newly-established Dissenters' college; and the next
day--being just about the time that the grim priest of Gretna was
forging the bonds of Hymen for the happy and lovely couple before him,
Mr. Tag-rag was hauled off in the way which I have mentioned--which two
occurrences would have the effect of enabling Mr. Dismal Horror to prove
the disinterestedness of his attachment--an opportunity for which he
vowed that he panted--inasmuch as he and she had become, indeed, all the
world to each other. He must now go into some other line of business, in
order to support his fond and lovely wife; and, as for Tag-rag, his
pious purposes were frustrated altogether. There was no impeaching the
validity of the bond held by the infuriate and inexorable Jew who had
arrested him, and who clearly had been no party to any fraud by
which--if any--the signature of Mr. Tag-rag had been procured. Mr.
Tag-rag's attorney, Mr. Snout, instantly called upon Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, to inquire into the particulars of the astounding
transaction by which his client had been drawn into so ruinous a
liability--but was very cavalierly treated; for he was informed that Mr.
Tag-rag must, in their opinion, have lost his senses--at all events his
memory; for that he had most deliberately executed the bond, after its
nature had been fully explained to him by Mr. Gammon--and his signature
was witnessed and attested in the usual way by a clerk in the office,
and also in the presence of all the three partners. On hearing all
this--and examining Mr. Amminadab, who stated without any hesitation, as
the fact in truth was, that he had been called in specially to witness
Mr. Tag-rag's execution of the bond, and had seen and heard him
sign,[19] and say he delivered it as his act and deed--Mr. Snout hurried
back to his frenzied client, and endeavored, for a long while, with
praiseworthy patience, to reason with him; explaining to him the glaring
improbability of his version of the affair. This led to very high words
indeed between them, and at length Mr. Tag-rag actually spit in his
face. Mr. Snout, being a very little man, and unable to resent the vile
insult effectually, instantly quitted the room, expressing his firm
belief that Mr. Tag-rag was a swindler, and he would no more be
concerned for a person of that description. Mr. Tag-rag could not
procure bail for so fearful an amount; so he committed an act of
bankruptcy, by remaining in prison for three weeks. Down, then, came all
his creditors upon him in a heap, especially the Jew; a rattling
bankruptcy ensued--the upshot of the whole being--to anticipate,
however, a little--that a first and final dividend was declared of three
farthings in the pound--for it turned out that friend Tag-rag had been,
like many of his betters, _speculating_ a great deal more than any one
had had the least idea of. I ought, however, to have mentioned that, as
soon as he had become bankrupt, and his assignees had been appointed,
they caused an indictment to be preferred against Mr. Titmouse, and
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, for fraud and conspiracy in obtaining
the bond from Mr. Tag-rag; and on the same grounds, made an application,
fortified by strong affidavits, to the Lord Chancellor, to strike the
last three gentlemen off the rolls. In addition to all this, the two
other unfortunate mortgagees, Mordecai Gripe, and Mephibosheth
Mahar-shalal-hash-baz--who had no security at all for their advances
except the title-deeds of the estate, and the personal covenant of Mr.
Titmouse--beset the office in Saffron Hill from morning to night, like
frantic fiends, and nearly drove poor old Mr. Quirk out of his senses.
Mr. Snap was peremptory and insolent; while Gammon seldom made his
appearance--and would see no one at his private residence, pleading
serious indisposition.

After anxious reflection, Mr. Gammon did not absolutely despair of
extricating himself from the perils with which he was personally
environed. As for certain fond hopes of political advancement, after
which, indeed, his soul had so long pined, he did not even yet abandon
the hope of being able to prevail on his friend at headquarters--to whom
he had undoubtedly rendered considerable political services at no little
personal risk--to overlook the accident which had befallen him, in the
adverse verdict for the bribery penalties, even should he fail in his
motion to defeat that verdict in the ensuing term. He had had indeed, a
distinct intimation, that--that one obstacle removed--a very important
and influential situation under government was within his reach. But,
alas! this last overwhelming misfortune--how could he possibly evade or
surmount it? What human ingenuity or intrepidity could avail to
extricate him from the consequences of his insane avowal to Miss
Aubrey--and his counter-statements to the Duke of Tantallan and Miss
Macspleuchan--to say nothing of the Earl of Dreddlington? He resolved to
risk it--to rely on his own resources, and the chapter of accidents. The
mere presence of difficulty strung his nerves to encounter it. He
resolved to rely on the impossibility of fixing him directly with a
knowledge of the rottenness of Titmouse's pretensions--at all events,
till a period considerably subsequent to the trial, and Titmouse's
marriage with the Lady Cecilia. It occurred to him, as calculated,
moreover, to aid his contemplated movements, if he could find a fair
pretext for throwing overboard his partners, especially Mr.
Quirk--satisfied that his own uniform caution had prevented him from
committing himself to them--or at least had deprived them of means of
proving it. He very soon met with an opportunity, of which he promptly
availed himself.

Some week or ten days after the commencement of the term, Mr. Quirk was
walking down Parliament Street, on his way to the Court of King's Bench,
hoping, among other things, to hear the court say whether they would
grant or refuse a rule _nisi_ for a new trial, in a certain cause of
WIGLEY _v._ GAMMON, which had been moved for on the first day of term by
Sir Charles Wolstenholme, and which Lord Widdrington had said the court
would take a day or two's time to consider. Mr. Quirk's eye caught the
figure of a person, a few steps in advance of him, whom he fancied he
had seen before. In a few minutes' time, the old gentleman was covered
with a cold perspiration; for in a young man, about thirty years old,
decently dressed--thin, sallow, and wearing a very depressed air--Mr.
Quirk recognized Mr. STEGGARS--a gentleman whom he had imagined to be at
that moment comfortably settled, and for some ten years yet to come and
unexpired, at Botany Bay! This was the individual, it may be
recollected, whose execrable breach of trust, when a clerk of Mr.
Parkinson's at Grilston, had led to Mr. Quirk's discovery of the
infirmity in Mr. Aubrey's title. The fact was, that Mr. Steggars had
quitted England, as the reader may recollect, horribly disgusted with
Mr. Quirk's conduct towards him; and had also subsequently experienced
some little remorse on account of his own mean and cruel conduct towards
a distinguished gentleman and his family, none of whom had ever given
him the slightest pretext for hostility or revenge. He had contrived to
make his feelings upon the subject known to an official individual at
Botany Bay, who had given him an opportunity of explaining matters fully
to the authorities at home--the principal of whom, the Home
Secretary--had been, and indeed continued to be, a warm personal friend
of Mr. Aubrey's. This minister caused inquiries to be made concerning
Steggars' behavior while abroad, which were so satisfactorily answered
as to procure a remission of the remainder of his sentence, just as he
was entering upon his fourth year's service at Botany Bay. Immediately
on his return--which had taken place only a few days before the
commencement of Michaelmas Term--he sought out Mr. Aubrey's attorneys,
Messrs. Runnington, and put them fully in possession of all the facts of
the case, relating to Mr. Quirk's grossly dishonorable conduct in
obtaining and acting upon a knowledge of the supposed defect in Mr.
Aubrey's title. Upon Mr. Quirk's coming alongside of this gentleman, and
looking at him with a most anxious inquisitiveness, he encountered a
fearfully significant glance--and then Mr. Steggars, in a very pointed
and abrupt manner, crossed over the street for the purpose of avoiding
him. Mr. Quirk was so dreadfully disconcerted by this occurrence, that
instead of going on to court, where he would have heard Mr. Gammon's
rule for a new trial _refused_, he retraced his steps homeward, and
arrived at the office just as a clerk was inquiring for him; and who, on
seeing him, put into his hands the following startling document, being a
_"Rule"_ which had been granted the day before, by the Court of King's
Bench:--

     "On reading the Affidavit of JONATHAN STEGGARS, the affidavits of
     James Parkinson and Charles Runnington, and the paper-writing
     marked A, all thereunto annexed, It is ORDERED that Caleb Quirk,
     Gentleman, an attorney of this Honorable Court, do, on Wednesday
     next, in this present term, show cause why he should not forthwith
     deliver up to Charles Aubrey, Esquire, the deeds and documents
     specified in the paper-writing thereto annexed, marked A, _and
     also, why he should not answer the matters contained in the said
     Affidavits_.[20] Upon the motion of Sir Charles Wolstenholme.

     "By the Court."

"Oh Lord!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, faintly, and, sinking into his chair,
inquired for Mr. Gammon; but, as usual, he had not been at Saffron Hill
that day. Giving orders to Mr. Amminadab to have copies taken
immediately of the affidavits mentioned in the rule, Mr. Quirk set off
for Mr. Gammon's chambers, but missed that gentleman, who he learned,
had gone to Westminster. The next day Mr. Gammon called at the office,
but Mr. Quirk was absent; on going, however, into the old gentleman's
room, Mr. Gammon's eye lit on the above-mentioned "rule," and also on
the affidavits upon which it had been granted. Having hurriedly glanced
over them, he hastily replaced them on the desk, as he had found them,
and repaired to his own room, greatly flustered--resolved to wait for
Mr. Quirk's arrival, and appear to be informed by him, for the first
time, of the existence of the aforesaid formidable documents. While he
was really buried in a revery, with his head resting on one hand and a
pen in the other, his countenance miserably pale and harassed, Mr. Quirk
burst hastily into his room with the rule and affidavits in his hand.

"Oh Lord, Gammon! How are you, Gammon?" he stuttered. "Haven't seen you
this age!--Where have you been? How are you, eh?" and he grasped very
cordially the cold hand of Mr. Gammon, which did not return the
pressure.

"I am not very well, Mr. Quirk; but--you seem agitated!--Has anything
fresh hap"----

"Fresh?--Ecod, my dear Gammon! Fresh, indeed! Here's a _new_ enemy come
into the field!--D----d if I don't feel going mad!--Look, Gammon,
look!"--and he placed the rule and affidavits in Mr. Gammon's hands, and
sat down beside him.

"What!--_Answer the matters in the affidavit?_" quoth Gammon,
amazedly.--"Why, what have you been doing, Mr. Quirk? And--who upon
earth is--_Jonathan Steggars_?"

"Who's Steggars!" echoed Mr. Quirk, stupidly.

"Yes, Mr. Quirk--_Steggars_. Who is he?" repeated Gammon, intrepidly.

"Steggars, you know--Gammon! You recollect Steggars, of course--eh?"
inquired Mr. Quirk, with an apprehensive stare--"Steggars;
_Steggars_--you know! eh? You don't recollect! Oh, botheration! Come,
come, Gammon!"

"Who is he?" again inquired Gammon, somewhat sternly.

"Oh Lud! oh Lud! oh Lud!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, despairingly--"What _are_
you after, Gammon? You don't intend--it can't be--that you're going
to--eh?--It's Steggars, you know--we defended him, you know--and he got
transported for embezzling that mortgage money of Mr. Parkinson's. You
recollect how we got hold of Mr. Aubrey's story from him?" While Mr.
Quirk was saying all this with feverish impetuosity, Mr. Gammon appeared
to be, for the first time, glancing eagerly over the affidavits.

"Why--good heavens, Mr. Quirk!" said he, presently, with a start--"is it
possible that these statements can have the slightest foundation in
fact?"

"Ay, drat it--that _you_ know as well as I do, Gammon," replied Mr.
Quirk, with not a little eagerness and trepidation--"Come, come, it's
rather late in the day to sham Abraham just now, friend Gammon!"

"Do you venture, Mr. Quirk, to stand there, and deliberately charge me
with being a party to the grossly dishonorable conduct of which you are
here accused upon oath--which, indeed, you admit yourself to have been
guilty of?"

"D----d if I don't, Master Gammon!" replied Mr. Quirk, slapping his hand
on the table after a long pause, in which he looked completely
confounded and aghast. "Why, you'll want, by-and-by, to persuade me that
my name isn't Caleb Quirk--why, zounds! you'll drive me mad! You're gone
mad yourself--you must be!"

"How dare you insult me, sir, by charging me with conniving at your
infamous and most unprofessional conduct?"

"Why--come!" cried Quirk, with a horrible laugh--"You don't know how we
first got scent of the whole thing?--Ah, ha! It dropped down from the
clouds, I suppose, into our office--oh Lud, Lud, Gammon! it isn't kind
to leave an old friend in the lurch at such a pinch as this!"

"I tell you, Mr. Quirk, that I never had the least idea in the world
that this wretch Steggars--Faugh! I should have scouted the whole thing!
I would rather have retired from the firm!"

"That's it, Gammon! Go on, Gammon! This is uncommonly funny! It is,
indeed, aha!" quoth Quirk, trembling violently.

"This is no time for trifling, sir, believe me. Let me tell you thus
much, in all candor--that I certainly had, from the first, misgivings as
to the means by which you became possessed of this information; but
considering our relative situations, I did not feel myself at liberty to
press you on the point--Oh, Mr. Quirk, I am really shocked beyond all
bounds! What will the profession say of"--

"D---- the profession! What d'ye suppose I must be just now thinking of
_you_? Why, you'd make a dog strike its father!"

"I may have been unfortunate, Mr. Quirk--I may have been imprudent; but
I have never been dishonorable--and I would not for the whole creation
have my name associated with this infernal transac"----

"Come, come--who wanted me to forge a tombstone, Gammon?" inquired Mr.
Quirk, glancing very keenly at his friend.

"Wanted you to forge a tombstone, sir!" echoed Gammon, with an astounded
air.

"Ay! ay! Forge a tombstone!" repeated Mr. Quirk, dropping his voice, and
slapping one hand upon the other.

"Upon my word and honor, Mr. Quirk, I pity you! You've lost your
senses!"

"You wanted me to forge a tombstone! D----d if you didn't!"

"You had better go home, Mr. Quirk, and take some physic to clear your
head, for I am sure you're going wrong altogether!" said Gammon.

"Oh, Gammon, Gammon! Aren't you ashamed of yourself? Come--honor among
thieves! Be honest for once"----

"Your conduct is so extraordinary, Mr. Quirk, that I must request you to
leave my room, sir"----

"I sha'n't--it's _mine_ too"--quoth Quirk, snapping his fingers with a
desperate air.

"Then I will, sir," replied Gammon, with a low bow; and, taking up his
hat, moved towards the door.

"You sha'n't, Gammon--you mustn't!" cried Quirk, but in vain--Mr.
Gammon had taken his final departure, leaving Mr. Quirk on the very
verge of madness. By-and-by he went into Snap's room, who sat there the
picture of misery and terror; for whereas it had always seemed to him
that he had never been fairly admitted into the confidence of his senior
partners in the very important matters which had been going on for the
last two years--now that all things were going wrong, he was candidly
given credit by Mr. Quirk and Mr. Gammon for having lent a helping hand
to everything from the very beginning! In fact, he was frightened out of
his wits at the terrible turn which matters were taking. 'T was he who
had to stand the brunt of the horrid badgering of the three frenzied
Jews; he was included in half-a-dozen indictments for fraud and
conspiracy, at the instance of the aforesaid Israelites, and of the
assignees of Mr. Tag-rag; and Heaven only could form a notion of what
other good things were in store for him! He wondered vastly that they
had not contrived to stick _his_ name into the affidavits which had that
day come in, and which seemed to have turned Mr. Quirk's head upside
down! Conscious, however, of his own innocence, he resolved to hold on
to the last, with a view, in the event of the partnership blowing up, of
scraping together a nice little practice out of the remnants.

Half recklessly, and half in furtherance of some designs which he was
forming, Gammon followed up, on the ensuing morning, his move with Mr.
Quirk, by sending to him and to Mr. Snap a formal written notice of his
intention to retire from the partnership, in conformity with the
provisions of their articles, at the end of a calendar month from the
date; and he resolved to take no part at all in the matter to which Mr.
Quirk's attention had been so sternly challenged by the Court of King's
Bench--leaving Mr. Quirk to struggle through it as best he might.

But what was Mr. Gammon to do?

He could not stir a step in any direction for want of money--getting
every hour more and more involved and harassed on this score. The
ecclesiastical suit he had given up, and Mr. Quod had instantly sent in
his heavy bill, requiring immediate payment--reminding Mr. Gammon that
he had pledged himself to see him paid, whatever might be the issue.
Here, again, was an action of ejectment, on a tremendous scale, actually
commenced, and being vigorously carried on--with evidently unlimited
funds at command--for the recovery of every acre of the Yatton property.
Was it to be resisted? Where were the funds? Here he was, again,
already a defendant in four indictments, charging fraud and
conspiracy--proceedings entailing a most destructive expense; and his
motion for a new trial, in the action for the bribery penalty having
failed, he was now liable to pay, almost instantly, a sum exceeding
£3,000 to the plaintiff, for debt and costs. As for the balance of their
bill against Mr. Aubrey, that was melting away hourly in the
taxing-office; and the probable result would be an action against them,
at the suit of Mr. Aubrey, for maliciously holding him to bail. Was it
possible, thought Gammon, to make the two promissory notes of Mr. Aubrey
available, by discontinuing the actions commenced upon them, and
indorsing them over at a heavy discount? He took an opinion upon the
point--which was to the effect, that such a step could not _then_ be
taken, so as to give any third party a better right against Mr. Aubrey
than Mr. Titmouse had. Even had this, however, been otherwise, an
unexpected obstacle arose in Mr. Spitfire, who now held Mr. Gammon at
arm's length, and insisted on going forward with the actions; but he, in
his turn, was, as it were, checkmated by a move of Mr. Runnington's in
the Court of Chancery; where he obtained an injunction against
proceeding with the actions on the notes, till the result of the pending
action of ejectment should have been ascertained; and, in the event of
the lessor of the plaintiff recovering, an account taken of the mesne
profits which had been received by Mr. Titmouse. No one, of course,
would now advance a farthing on mortgage of Mr. Titmouse's interest in
the Yatton property; and Mr. Gammon's dearly earned rent-charge of
£2,000 a-year had become mere waste parchment, and as such he destroyed
it. The advertisements concerning Lord De la Zouch's bond had
effectually restrained Mr. Gammon from raising anything upon it; since
any one advancing money upon the security of its assignment, must have
put it in suit against his Lordship, when due, in the name of Mr.
Titmouse, and any answer to an action by him, would of course operate
against the party using his name. Mr. Gammon then bethought himself of
felling the timber at Yatton; but, as if that step on his part had been
anticipated, before they had got down more than a couple of trees at the
extremity of the estate, down came an injunction from the Lord
Chancellor, and so there was an end of all resources from that quarter.
Should he try the experiment of offering to surrender Yatton without the
delay and expense of defending the ejectment? He knew he should be
laughed at; they must quickly see that he had no funds to fight with,
even had he the slightest case to support. Mr. Gammon saw that Mr.
Aubrey's position was already impregnable, and the notion of a
compromise utterly ridiculous. As for resources of his own, he had
none, for he had been exceedingly unfortunate in his dealings in the
British and foreign funds, and had suffered severely and unexpectedly
through his connection with one or two of the bubble companies of the
day. In fact, he was liable to be called upon at any moment for no less
a sum than £3,000, and interest, which had been advanced to him on
security of a joint and several bond given by himself and Mr. Titmouse;
and he lived in daily dread lest the increasing frequency of the rumors
to his discredit, should get to the ears of this particular creditor,
and precipitate his demand of repayment. To the vexation occasioned by
this direct pecuniary embarrassment, and by the impossibility of
retrieving himself by a move in any direction--being, in short, in a
complete _dead-lock_--were to be added other sources of exquisite
anxiety and mortification. To say nothing of the perilous legal and
criminal liabilities which he had incurred, the consciousness of his
appearing an atrocious liar, and indeed an impostor, in the eyes of the
Duke of Tantallan, of the Earl of Dreddlington, of Miss Macspleuchan, of
the Aubreys, of _Miss Aubrey_--in fact, of every one who saw or heard of
what he had done--stung him almost to madness; considerations of this
kind were infinitely more insupportable than all the others by which he
was oppressed, put together. And when he reflected that the Lord
Chancellor, to whose favorable notice he had ever fondly aspired--and to
a considerable extent, successfully--had been put in possession of all
the heavy charges made against him, on the score of fraud and
conspiracy, by means of the various motions made before his Lordship,
and the affidavits by which they were supported, he felt his soul
withered within him. In short, it must surely appear, by this time, that
the devil had, in his dismal sport, got his friend Mr. Gammon up into a
corner.

In like manner Mr. Titmouse had his lesser troubles--for he was all of a
sudden reduced very nearly to the verge of literal starvation. His
creditors of every kind and degree seemed actuated by the spirit of the
law of the Twelve Tables--which, when a debtor was insolvent, permitted
his creditors to cut him, bodily, physically, into pieces, in proportion
to the respective magnitudes of their claims against him. Actions were
commenced against him by the three Jews, on his covenants to repay the
principal and interest due on the mortgages; half-a-dozen more were
pending against him on bills of exchange and promissory notes, which he
had given for various sums of money which had been lent him, though he
had no means of proving the fact, on terms of the most monstrous usury.
Scarcely was there a single tradesman in town or country with whom he
had ever dealt, who had not sued, or was not about to sue him. Every
article of furniture both at Yatton and at his lodgings--great or small,
cabs, harness, horses--all had disappeared: and, but for the protection
afforded to his person by privilege of Parliament, he would have been
pounced upon by at least a hundred ravenous and infuriate creditors in
an instant, and never been seen or heard of any more, except on the
occasion of some feeble and vain cry for relief under the Insolvent
Debtors' Act. He had been obliged, on coming up from Yatton, to borrow
five pounds from poor Dr. Tatham!--who, though infinitely surprised at
the application, and greatly inconvenienced by compliance with it, lent
him cheerfully the sum he asked for; Titmouse, the little scamp,
pledging himself to enclose the doctor a five-pound note by the first
post after his reaching town. That, however, even had he ever intended
giving the matter a thought, he could no more have done than he could
have sent Dr. Tatham the mitre of the Archbishop of Canterbury; in
consequence of which the worthy little doctor was obliged to postpone
his long-meditated purchase of a black coat and breeches indefinitely.
The morning after Titmouse's return, he betook himself to Saffron Hill,
which he reached just as Mr. Quirk and Mr. Snap, deserted by Mr. Gammon,
were endeavoring, in great tribulation and terror, to concoct affidavits
in answer to those on which the rule in the Court of King's Bench had
been obtained. Mr. Amminadab, with a little hesitation, yielded to his
importunities, and allowed him to go into Mr. Quirk's room.

"Oh, Lud! Oh, Lud--you--you--you--infernal little villain!" cried out
Mr. Quirk, hastily approaching him, pale and stuttering with fury--and,
taking him by the collar, turned him out by main force.

"I say!--I say!--Come, sir! I'm a member of"----

"I'll _member_ you, you impostor! Get out with you!--get out!"

"So help me----! I'll go to some other attor"----gasped Titmouse,
ineffectually struggling against Mr. Quirk.

"Eugh!--Beast!" exclaimed Snap, who kept by the side of Mr. Quirk, ready
to give any assistance which might be requisite.

"What have I----eh?--What have I done--demme!--Come, come--hollo! hands
off"----

"If ever--if ever--if ever you dare show your cursed little face
here--again"--sputtered Mr. Quirk, trembling with rage.

"This is a breach of privilege!--On my life I'll--I really _will_--I'll
complain to the House to-night." By this time he had been forced through
the outer passage into the street, and the door closed furiously behind
him. A little crowd was instantly collected around him, and he might
possibly have thought of addressing it in terms of indignant eloquence,
but he was deterred by the approach of a policeman, with a very
threatening countenance, and slunk down Saffron Hill in a truly shocking
state of mind. Then he hurried to Thavies' Inn, pale as death--and with
a tremulous voice inquired for Mr. Gammon; but that gentleman had given
special orders to be invariably denied to him. Again and again he
called--and was again and again repulsed; and though he lingered on one
or two occasions for an hour at least, in order to waylay Mr. Gammon, it
was in vain. Letter after letter he sent, but with no better effect; and
at length the laundress refused to take them in.

Gammon _dared_ not see Titmouse; not because he feared Titmouse, but
himself.

The House of Commons was sitting, unusual as was such an occurrence at
that time of the year; but Parliament had been called together on a
special urgency, and a very fierce and desperate contest was carrying on
between the Opposition and the Ministers, whose very existence was at
stake, and almost nightly divisions were melting down their majority,
till they were within an ace of being in a positive minority. Under
these circumstances, although Mr. Titmouse's position had become a
matter of notoriety, and he could no longer exhibit in public even the
outside show and trappings of a man of fashion, beyond his mere personal
finery, (which had become very precious, because he saw no means of
replacing it,) and though he was _cut_, as a matter of course, by every
one out of doors, yet he found he had one friend, at least, in his
extremity, who scorned to imitate the fickle and perfidious conduct of
all around him. That frank and manly individual was no less a person, to
his honor be it spoken, than the Secretary of the Treasury--_and
whipper-in_--Mr. Flummery; who always spoke to him in the most cordial
and confiding manner, and once or twice even asked him to join his
dinner-table at Bellamy's. On one of these occasions, Mr. Titmouse
resolved to put Mr. Flummery's friendship to the test, and boldly asked
for a "_place_." His distinguished friend appeared certainly startled
for a moment, and then evidently felt inwardly tickled, as was evinced
by a faint twitching at the corners of his mouth. He proceeded, however,
in a very confidential manner, to ask Mr. Titmouse as to his familiarity
with financial matters; for (in the most sacred confidence) it did so
happen that, although no one knew it but himself and one other person,
there was sure to be a vacancy in a certain office within a fortnight at
farthest; and without saying anything further, Mr. Flummery laid his
finger on his lip, and looked steadfastly at Titmouse, who did
similarly; and within half an hour's time made one of a glorious
majority of four, obtained by the triumphant Ministry. Titmouse was now
in excellent spirits concerning his future prospects, and felt that, if
he could but contrive to hold on during the fortnight intervening
between him and his accession to office, all would be well. He therefore
conceived he had nothing to do but apply to some one or two friends,
whom he had accommodated with loans, for repayment. But, alas! Mr.
O'Doodle acknowledged that his exchequer was empty just then; and Mr.
M'Squash said he really fancied he had repaid Mr. Titmouse the hundred
pounds which he had lent him, but would look and see. Then Mr. Titmouse
ventured to apply to Mr. O'Gibbet--that gentleman being Titmouse's
debtor to the tune of some five hundred pounds. He called Mr. Titmouse
aside, and in the most delicate and feeling manner intimated the delight
it would have afforded him to respond to the call of Mr. Titmouse under
ordinary circumstances; but the fact was, he felt placed in a most
painfully embarrassing position, on account of the grave doubts which
had occurred to him, as to the right of Mr. Titmouse either to have
lent the money at all, or, consequently, to receive repayment of it. In
short, the lawyers would call this setting up the _jus tertii_; Mr.
O'Gibbet protesting that he looked upon himself, in point of conscience,
as a trustee of the money for the real owner; and, till _he_ should have
been discovered, bound to retain it--so pleasant is _sometimes_ the
performance of one's duty! Titmouse could not in the least appreciate
these exquisite scruples; but knowing Mr. O'Gibbet's influence over Mr.
Flummery, he feigned to acquiesce in the propriety of what was advanced
by Mr. O'Gibbet, who, on being pressed, _lent_ him five pounds.

Finding that those whom he had till then imagined bound to consider his
interests, had, in so unprincipled and ungrateful a manner, deserted
him, he resolved to be true to himself, and bent all the powers of his
mind to the contemplation of his present circumstances, and how he
should act with advantage. After due and deep reflection, a very
felicitous stroke occurred to him. He did not know the exact state of
the question with reference to the right to the possession of
Yatton--little dreaming that, in point of fact, Mr. Aubrey was at that
moment virtually reinstated in the enjoyment of that fine estate. Now,
it occurred to Mr. Titmouse as very probable, that his opponent would
catch at any fair offer of a compromise, since he--Titmouse--had
unquestionably the advantage over him at present, having nine-tenths of
the law on his side--viz. _possession_; and if he were to propose to
split their differences by making an offer of his hand and heart to Miss
Aubrey, it could do no harm, and _might_ be attended with the happiest
results. How was she to know the desperate shifts to which he was driven
at present? And if he could but contrive, consistently with his pledge
to Mr. Flummery, to give her an inkling of the brilliant prospects that
awaited him! In short, I am able to give the reader an exact copy of a
letter which, after infinite pains, two days being spent over it, he
sent to Miss Aubrey; and which was duly forwarded to her, and deposited
in her hands, as she alighted from her horse, on returning from a ride
with Mr. Delamere and Lord De la Zouch. Here follows that skilful and
touching performance:--

                                                "House of Comons,
                                           "_Wednesday_ Nov. --, 18--.

     "(_Private._)

     "Madam,--hoping That this Will not Disapoint you Through
     Strangeness (which I own Looks Somewhat So) at First sight of my
     adressing This Epistle to You, to Say Ever since I Have had The
     unhapiness to be a Widdower Since the Death of Lady Cecilia
     Titmouse of which There Is Many False accounts Every Thing Goes
     Entirely Wrong (For the present) with me, all For Want of a Lady
     Which w^d. feel That Conubial Interest in me That is So delightful
     In the Married State. I was Honored With writing To You soon After
     I was so Happy as to Get the Property But Supose you could not Have
     Got It Seeing I got No Ans^r. And Natrally suposed There Was
     obstacles In The Way For it Was Settled Soon as You might have
     Heard That I was to Mary my Cousin (The Lady Cecilia) whom I Loved
     Truly till Death cut Her Short On her Way To an Erly Grave, Alas. I
     know It is In Dispute wh^r. y^r. respectable Brother or I are
     Owners of Yatton You See The Law which Gave It me Once _may Give it
     Me Again and No Mistake_--who knows (in this uncertain Life)
     whatever Turns Up I can (Betwixt Ourselves) assure You There Is
     _Something In The Wind_ For me w^h. dare not Say More Of at this
     Present. But Suposing You & I shall Hit it what Say You if I should
     Propose dividing The Estate betwixt Him & Me & _Settling All my
     Half on You_ And as To the _Title_ (w^h. at present I Am Next to)
     what say You To your Brother and I Tossing up for it When It comes
     for I am Sorry to hear His Lordship is breaking, and I know _Who I
     sh^d. Like To see Lady Drelincourt_, oh what a hapiness Only To
     think Of, As They are dividing very soon (And they Do Run It
     _Uncommon_ _Fine_, But Ministers Must Be Suported or The Country
     Will Go to the Devil Dogs) Must Close Begging an Answer directed to
     Me Here, And Subscribe myself,

                                        "Hn^d. and dear Madam,
                                            "Yr^s. Most Obediently,
                                                           "T. TITMOUSE.

     "MISS AUBREY,
       "Vivian Street."

"I hope, Kate, you have not been giving this gentleman encouragement!"
quoth Delamere, when he had read the above. It formed a topic of
pleasant merriment when they all met at dinner--a right cheerful party,
consisting solely of the Aubreys and Lord and Lady De la Zouch, and
Delamere. Mr. Aubrey had returned from town with important intelligence.

"Mr. Runnington is steadily and patiently unravelling," said he, as they
sat in unrestrained converse after dinner--(I must take the opportunity
of saying that Miss Aubrey looked as beautiful as ever, and in brilliant
spirits)--"one of the most monstrous tissues of fraud that ever was
woven by man! We sometimes imagine that Mr. Gammon must have had in view
the securing Yatton for himself! The firm of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap, are completely overwhelmed with the consequences of their
abominable conduct!--I understand they have terribly taken in the
Jews--to the amount of at least seventy or eighty thousand pounds of
hard cash; and one of them, it seems, on discovering that he has no real
and effectual security, very nearly succeeded in hanging himself the
other day."

"What's this I see in the paper about a Mr. Tag-rag?" inquired Lord De
la Zouch:--and Mr. Aubrey told him the miserable condition to which
Tag-rag had been reduced by the alleged chicanery of the firm of Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap.

"Mr. Runnington seems to be managing matters with great vigor and
skill," said his Lordship.

"Admirably! admirably! I never in my life saw or heard of such complete
success as attends every step he takes against the enemy; he is hourly
pressing them nearer and nearer to the verge of the precipice, and
cutting off all retreat. They would fight, but they have no funds! Look
at the administration suit!" Mr. Aubrey then proceeded to mention two
very important circumstances which had come to his knowledge since his
former visit to town. First, an offer was understood to have come direct
from Mr. Gammon, to abandon the defence to the ejectment, on condition
of his receiving, on behalf of Mr. Titmouse, the sum of two thousand
pounds; but Mr. Runnington had peremptorily refused to listen to any
proposal of the kind, and the action was, at that moment, in full
progress, with every prospect of there being no real defence even
attempted. The next piece of intelligence was, that Messrs. Screw and
Son, the solicitors to the Vulture Insurance Company, had called on
Messrs. Runnington, on learning that they were the solicitors of the
party to whom letters of administration had been granted, and intimated
that the directors--those discreet and candid gentlemen--"taking all the
circumstances of the case into their consideration," had determined to
offer no further opposition to the payment of the policy on the life of
the late Lady Stratton. Mr. Screw talked very finely about the high
principle and good feeling which ever actuated that distinguished
Company; but he did not tell Mr. Runnington what was the real cause of
their abandoning their opposition, which was this--that before their
"commission" to examine their sole witness, Dr. Podagra, could have
reached China, they had accidentally received authentic intelligence of
his death; he having been killed by a crowd for vaccinating the infant
of one of the Chinese! Under these circumstances, Mr. Runnington agreed
to the terms proposed on the part of the Company; viz. that the action
be discontinued forthwith, each party pay their own costs, and the whole
amount of the policy, minus the £2,000 which had been advanced to Lady
Stratton, be paid to Mr. Aubrey within a month from the day of
discontinuing the action. Though Kate very vehemently protested against
it, she was at length persuaded to allow her brother to act according to
the manifest intentions of the venerable deceased; and he in his turn
received a very gratifying assurance that she would have given him,
under the special circumstances of the case, no anxiety respecting his
bond for £2,000 given to Lady Stratton! Thus was Kate no longer a
dowerless maiden; having at her absolute disposal a sum of thirteen
thousand pounds, in addition to which, in the event of their being
restored to the possession of Yatton, she would be in the receipt of the
income left her as a charge upon the estate by her father; viz. five
hundred a-year.

While the cheering sunshine of returning prosperity was thus beaming
with daily increasing warmth and brightness upon the Aubreys,

     "And all the clouds that lower'd upon their house,"

were,

          "In the deep bosom of the ocean buried"--

the sun of that proud and weak old man, the Earl of Dreddlington, was
indeed going down in darkness. The proceedings which have been laid at
length before the reader, arising out of the extraordinary termination
of the inquiry set on foot by the ecclesiastical court, and quickly
ending in the adoption of measures for the immediate recovery of Yatton,
had attracted far too much of public attention to admit of their being
concealed from the earl, comparatively secluded from the world though
he was. But the frightful confirmation of his assertion concerning what
had occurred between himself and Mr. Gammon, respecting Titmouse,
appeared to make no commensurate impression upon a mind no longer
capable of appreciating it. He had been seized by a partial paralysis
shortly after the last interview between himself, Mr. Gammon, and the
Duke of Tantallan; and it was evident that his reason was failing
rapidly. And it was perhaps a merciful dispensation, for it appeared
that the cup of his misery and mortification was not even yet full. That
other monstrous fabric of absurdity and fraud, built upon public
credulity--the Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company--suddenly dropped to
pieces, principally on account of its chief architect, Mr. Gammon, being
unable to continue that attention and skill by which it had been kept so
long in existence. It suddenly exploded, involving everybody concerned
in it in ruin. The infatuated, and now dismayed, shareholders, and the
numerous and designing creditors, came crowding round the more prominent
of the parties concerned, clamorous and desperate. Meetings were called
from time to time--producing, however, no other results, than fearfully
extending the prospect of liability incurred. The shareholders had
fondly imagined that they could repose with confidence on the provision
inserted in the prospectus, and in the deed of settlement--viz. that no
one was to be liable beyond the amount of their shares actually
subscribed for: alas! how dreadful the delusion, and how quickly
dissipated! The houses of Lord Dreddlington, the Duke of Tantallan, and
others, were besieged by importunate creditors; and at length a general
meeting was called, at which resolutions were passed, strongly
reflecting upon the Earl of Dreddlington and Mr. Gammon; and directing
the solicitor concerned for the rest of the shareholders to file a bill
against the earl and Mr. Gammon, for the purpose of compelling them to
pay all the debts incurred by the Company! More than this, it was
threatened that unless satisfactory proposals were promptly received
from, or made on behalf of, the Earl of Dreddlington, he would be
proceeded against as a TRADER liable to the bankrupt-laws, and a docket
forthwith struck against him! Of this crowning indignity impending over
his head, the poor old peer was fortunately not conscious, being at the
moment resident at Poppleton Hall, in a state not far removed from
complete imbecility. The Duke of Tantallan was similarly threatened; and
alarmed and enraged almost to a pitch of madness, resolved to take
measures for completely exposing and punishing the individual, to whose
fraudulent plausibility and sophistries he justly attributed the
calamity which had befallen him and the Earl of Dreddlington.

"Out of this nettle danger, I'll yet pluck the flower _safety_"--said
Mr. Gammon to himself, as he sat inside one of the coaches going to
Brighton, towards the close of the month of November, being on the
morning after the explosion of the Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company.
Inextricably involved as he appeared, yet, conscious of his almost
boundless internal resources, he did not despair of retrieving himself,
and defeating the vindictive measures taken against him. His chambers
were besieged by applicants for admission--Titmouse among them; whose
senseless pertinacity, overheard by Gammon as he sat within, while his
laundress was being daily worried by Titmouse, several times excited
Gammon almost up to the point of darting out and splitting open the head
of the intruder; old Mr. Quirk also sent daily letters, in a piteous
strain, and called besides daily, begging to be reconciled to Gammon;
but he sternly turned a deaf ear to all such applications. In order to
escape this intolerable persecution, at all events for a while, and in
change of scene and air, unpropitious though the weather was, seek to
recruit his health and spirits, he had determined upon spending a week
at Brighton; telling no one, however, except his old and faithful
laundress, his destination; and instructing her to say that he was gone,
she believed, into Suffolk, but would certainly return to town within a
week. His pale and harassed features showed how much he required repose
and relief, but for these he sought in vain. He felt not a whit the
better after a two days' stay, though the weather had suddenly cleared
up, the sky become clear and bright, and the air brisk and bracing.
Whithersoever _he_ went, he carried about him a thick gloom which no
sunshine could penetrate, no breezes dissipate. He could find rest
nowhere, neither at home nor abroad, neither alone nor in company,
neither sleeping nor waking. His brow was clouded by a stern melancholy,
his heart was bursting with a sense of defeat, shame, exposure,
mortification; and with all his firmness of nerve, he could not
contemplate the future but with a shudder of apprehension. In fact, he
was in a state of intense nervous irritability and excitement from
morning to night. On the evening of the third day after his arrival, the
London paper, forwarded to him as usual from the neighboring library,
contained a paragraph which excited him not a little; it being to the
effect, that a named solicitor of eminence had been the day before
appointed by the Lord Chancellor to that very office--the one, in truth,
which Gammon knew his Lordship had all along destined for _him_; one
which he could have filled to admiration, which would have given him
permanent _status_ in society; the salary attached to it being,
moreover, £1,800 a-year! Gammon laid down the paper--a mist came before
his eyes--and a sense of desolation pervaded his soul. After a while his
eye lit on another part of the paper--gracious heavens!--there were
three or four lines which instantly roused him almost into madness. It
was an advertisement, stating that _he_ had "ABSCONDED," and offering a
reward of £200 to any one who would give information by which he might
be "_discovered and apprehended_!"

"_Absconded!_" he exclaimed aloud, starting up, and his eye flaming with
fury--"accursed miscreants! I'll quickly undeceive them!"--Instantly
unlocking his paper-case, he sat down and wrote off a letter to the
editor of the newspaper, giving his full name and address; most
indignantly denying his having attempted or dreamed of absconding;
stating that he should be in London within forty-eight hours; and
requiring an ample apology for the gross insult and libel which had been
perpetrated, to be inserted in the next number of his paper. Then he
wrote off to the solicitor, Mr. Winnington, who had conducted all the
town proceedings in the cause of _Wigley_ v. _Gammon_, alluding in terms
of indignation and astonishment to the offensive advertisement, and
assuring him that he should, within forty-eight hours, be found, as
usual, at his chambers, and prepared to make an immediate and
satisfactory arrangement in respect of the damages and costs which were
now due from him. In a similar strain he wrote to Mr. Runnington (who
had maintained throughout, personally, a cautious courtesy towards Mr.
Gammon)--begging him to postpone signing judgment in the action of _Doe
on the demise of Aubrey_ v. _Roe_, till the last day of term, as he had
a new and final proposal to make, which might have the effect of saving
great delay and expense. He added, that he had also a proposition to
offer upon the subject of Lord De la Zouch's bond and Mr. Aubrey's
promissory notes, and begged the favor of a line in answer, addressed to
him at his chambers in Thavies' Inn, and which he might find on his
arrival. To a similar effect, he also wrote to the solicitor who was
working the docket which had been struck against Mr. Tag-rag; and also
to the solicitor who was employed on behalf of the shareholders in the
Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company:--in all of them reprobating, in terms
of the keenest indignation, the unwarrantable and libellous use of his
name which had been made, and making appointments for the individuals
addressed to call at his chambers on the day after his arrival in town.
Having thus done all in his power to counteract the injurious effects
which were calculated to arise from so very premature and cruel a
measure as that which had been taken, in offering a reward for his
apprehension as an absconded felon, he folded up, sealed, and directed
the letters, and took them himself to the post-office, in time for that
night's post; and that he was really terribly excited, may be easily
believed. He did not touch the dinner which he found laid for him on his
return, but sat on the sofa, absorbed in thought, for nearly an hour:
when he suddenly rang the bell, ordered his clothes to be instantly got
ready for travelling, and his bill made out. He then went and secured a
place in that night's mail, which was starting for town at half-past
eight o'clock. At that hour he quitted Brighton, being the only inside
passenger--a circumstance which gave him an ample opportunity for
reflection, and of which doubtless he availed himself--at all events,
certain it is, that he closed not his eyes in sleep during the whole of
the journey. Greatly to the surprise of his laundress, he made his
appearance at his chambers between six and seven o'clock in the morning,
rousing her from bed. He had thus, it will be observed, reached town
contemporaneously with his own letters; and as all the appointments
which he had made, were for the day after that of his arrival, he had
secured a twenty-four hours' freedom from interruption of any sort, and
resolved to avail himself of it, by keeping within doors the whole of
the time, his laundress denying him, as usual, to any one who might
call. He asked her if she had seen or heard of the atrocious
advertisement which had appeared in yesterday's paper? She replied, in
tears, that she had; and added, that no doubt to that circumstance were
to be attributed the calls made yesterday from morning to night--an
announcement which seemed to heighten the excitement under which Mr.
Gammon was evidently laboring. As soon as his lamp had been lit, he
opened his paper-case, and wrote the following letter:--

                                   "_Thavies' Inn, Wednesday Morning._

     "DEAR HARTLEY,--As I have not missed an annual meeting of _our_
     little club for these ten years, I shall be found at my place,
     to-night, at nine to a moment: that is, by the way, if I shall be
     admitted, after the execrable advertisement concerning me which
     appeared in yesterday's papers, and the writer of which I will give
     cause, if I can discover him, to repent to the latest day he lives.
     I came up this morning suddenly, to refute, by my presence and by
     my acts, the villanous falsehoods about my absconding. _Entre
     nous_, I am somewhat puzzled, just now, certainly--but never fear!
     I shall find a way out of the wood yet. Expect me at nine, to a
     minute,--Yours as ever,
                                                            "O. GAMMON.

       "HARRY HARTLEY, Esq.
        "Kensington Square."

This he sealed and directed; and requesting his laundress to put it into
the office in time for the first post, without fail--he got into bed,
and slept for a couple of hours: when he awoke somewhat refreshed, made
his toilet as usual, and partook of a slight breakfast.

"_You_ did not suppose I had absconded, Mrs. Brown, eh?" he inquired
with a melancholy smile, as she removed his breakfast things.

"No, sir; indeed I did not believe a word of it--you've always been a
kind and just master to me, sir--and"--she raised her apron to her eyes,
and sobbed.

"And I hope long to continue so, Mrs. Brown. By the way, were not your
wages due a day or two ago?"

"Oh yes! sir--but it does not signify, sir, the least; though on second
thoughts--it does, sir; for my little niece is to be taken into the
country--she's dying, I fear--and her mother's been out of work for"----

"Here's a ten-pound note, Mrs. Brown," replied Mr. Gammon, taking one
from his pocket-book--"pay yourself your wages; write me a receipt as
usual, and keep the rest on account of the next quarter, if it will
assist you just now when you are in trouble." She took the bank-note
with many expressions of thankfulness; and but for her tears, which
flowed plentifully, she might have noticed that there was something
deadly in the eye of her kind and tranquil master. On her retiring, he
rose, and walked to and fro for a long time, with folded arms, wrapped
in profound meditation--from which he was occasionally unpleasantly
startled by hearing knocks at his door, and then his laundress assuring
the visitor that Mr. Gammon was out of town, but would return on the
morrow. It was a cheerless November day, the snow fluttering lazily
through the foggy air; but his room was made snug and cheerful enough,
by the large fire which he kept up. Opening his desk, he sat down, about
noon, and wrote a very long letter--in the course of which, however, he
repeatedly laid down his pen--got up and walked about, heaving deep
sighs, and being occasionally exceedingly agitated. At length he
concluded it, paused some time, and then folded it up, and sealed it.
Then he spent at least two hours in examining all the papers in his desk
and cabinet. A considerable number of them he burned, and replaced and
arranged the remainder carefully. Then again he walked up and down the
room. The cat, a very fine and favorite one, which had been several
years an inmate of the chambers, attracted his attention, by rubbing
against his legs. "Poor puss!" he exclaimed, stroking her fondly on the
back; and, after a while, the glossy creature sidled away, as it were
reluctantly, from his caressing hand, and lay comfortably coiled up on
the hearth-rug, as before. Again he walked to and fro, absorbed in
melancholy reflection for some time; from which he was roused, about
five, by Mrs. Brown bringing in the spare dinner--which, having barely
tasted, he soon dismissed, telling her that he felt a strange shooting
pain in his head, and that his eyes seemed sometimes covered by a mist:
but that he doubted not his being well enough to keep his appointment at
the club--as she knew had been his habit for years. He requested her to
have his dressing-room prepared by a quarter to eight, and a coach
fetched by eight o'clock precisely. As soon as she had withdrawn, he sat
down and wrote the following letter to the oldest and most devoted
personal friend he had in the world:

     "MY DEAR----. I entreat you, by our long unbroken friendship, to
     keep the enclosed letter by you, for a fortnight; and then, with
     your own hand, and alone, deliver it to the individual to whom it
     is addressed. Burn _this_ note--I mean the one which I am at this
     instant writing to you--the instant you shall have read it; and
     take care that no eye sees the enclosed but _hers_--or all my
     efforts to secure a _little_ provision for her will be frustrated.
     In the corner of the top drawer of my cabinet will be found, folded
     up, a document referred to in the enclosed letter--in fact, _my
     will_--and which I wish _you_, as an old friend, to take the very
     earliest opportunity of discovering, _accidentally_. You will find
     the _date_ all correct, and _safe_. But whether my fiendish
     persecutors will allow it to have any effect, situated as are my
     affairs, is more than doubtful. Still I will throw away no chance
     in favor of the being who has occupied so much of my last thoughts.
     Call here to-morrow--at any hour you please--and say that you have
     called to see me, _according to my appointment_, and produce and
     show the enclosed ordinary invitation, to any one who may inquire,
     as being the only communication which you have received from me
     since my return from Brighton. Bear all this in mind, by the value
     you set upon my friendship: _whatever you may then see or hear, be
     firm and prudent_.--O. G."

       "_Wednesday_."

In this letter he enclosed the long letter and the note already
mentioned; and having sealed and directed the whole, with elaborate
distinctness, he threw his cloak round him, and went with his packet to
the post-office, and with his own hand, after an instant's hesitation,
dropped it into the box, and returned to his chambers.

Then he took another sheet of paper, and wrote thus:

     "DEAR VIPER,--I doubt whether, after all, there will be a
     Dissolution; but, at any rate, I will perform my promise, and be
     ready with what you wish for Sunday week.--Yours ever,
                                                                "O. G.

     "P. S.--I shall call upon you on Saturday, without fail."

This he folded up and directed, and proceeded to commence the
following:--

                                          "_Thavies' Inn, Wednesday._

     "DEAR SIR,--I have finally determined to make every sacrifice in
     order to extricate myself, with honor, from my present
     embarrassments. You will, therefore, as soon as you get this,
     please to sell out all my"----

Here he laid down his pen; and Mrs. Brown presently announcing that
everything was ready in his dressing-room, he thanked her, and proceeded
to shave and dress. He was not more than a quarter of an hour over his
toilet. He had put on his usual evening dress--his blue body-coat,
black trousers, a plain shirt and black stock, and a white
waistcoat--scarcely whiter, however, than the face of him who wore it.

"I am going for the coach now, sir," said Mrs. Brown, knocking at the
door.

"If you please," he replied briskly and cheerfully--and the instant that
he had heard her close the outer door after her, he opened the secret
spring drawer in his desk, and took out a very small glass phial, with a
glass stopper, over which was tied some bladder to preserve its contents
from the air; then he carefully closed the drawer. His face was ghastly
pale; his knees trembled; his hands were cold and damp as those of the
dead. He took a strong peppermint lozenge from the mantelpiece, and
chewed it, while he removed the stopper from the bottle, which contained
about half a dram of the most subtle and potent poison which has been
discovered by man--one extinguishing life almost instantaneously, and
leaving no trace of its presence except a slight odor, which he had
taken the precaution of masking and overpowering with that of the
peppermint. He returned to get his hat, which was in his dressing-room;
he put it on--and in glancing at the glass, scarcely recognized the
ghastly image which it reflected. His chief object was, to complete the
deception he intended practising on the Insurance Company, with whom he
had effected a policy on his life for £2,000--and also to delude
everybody into the notion of his having died suddenly, but naturally.
Having stirred up the large red fire, and made a kind of hollow in it,
he took out the stopper, and dropped it, with the bladder, which had
been tied over it, into the fire. Then he took his pen in his right hand
with a fresh dip of ink in it; kneeled down on the fender, close to the
fire; faintly whispered "_Oh, Emma!_" poured the whole of the deadly
poison into his mouth, and succeeded in dropping the phial into the very
heart of the fire--falling down the next instant on the hearth-rug,
oblivious, insensible--_dead_. However it might have been, that the
moment after he had done this direful deed, he would have GIVEN THE
WHOLE UNIVERSE, had it been his, to have undone what he had done--he had
succeeded, _for the present_, in effecting his object.

Poor Mrs. Brown's terror, on discovering her master stretched senseless
on the floor--his hat pushed partly down over his eyes in the act of
falling--may be imagined. Medical assistance was called in, but only to
announce that "the vital spark had fled." It was clearly either
apoplexy, said the intelligent medical man, or an organic disease of the
heart. Of this opinion were the astute coroner and his jury, without
hesitation. The deceased had evidently been seized while in the very act
of writing to some broker. [Gammon had no more "_stock_" of any sort,
for all he had written that letter, than the cat which had unconsciously
witnessed, and been for a moment disturbed by, his death.] Mr. Hartley
came, and producing the note which he had received, spoke of the
disappointment which they had all felt on account of Mr. Gammon's
non-arrival. The other letters--the appointments which he had made for
the morrow--the evidence which he had taken care to enable his laundress
to give--all these things were decisive--it was really "scarcely a case
requiring an inquest;" but as they had been called, they returned a
verdict of "Died by the Visitation of God." He was buried, a few days
afterwards, in the adjoining churchyard, (St. Andrew's,) where he lies
mouldering away quietly enough, certainly; but whether (in the language
of the solemn and sublime burial-service which his successful fraud had
procured to be read over his remains) "_in sure and certain hope of the
resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ_," is
another, and a fearful question.

His "friend" was faithful and discreet, obeying the injunctions of the
deceased to the letter. The "individual" alluded to in Mr. Gammon's note
to him, was a beautiful girl whom Mr. Gammon had seduced under a solemn
promise of marriage; who was passionately attached to him; whose name he
had uttered when on the eve of death; and to whom he had, some six
months before, bequeathed the amount of the policy--his will being
witnessed by Mary Brown, his housekeeper. Though his creditors were, of
course, entitled to every farthing of the £2,000, out of which he had so
artfully swindled the Insurance Company, they generously allowed her, in
consideration of her peculiar and melancholy situation, and of the will
which Mr. Gammon had made in her favor, to receive the sum of three
hundred pounds. It sufficed to support her during the few months of
suffering and shame which were allotted to her upon earth, after the
death of her betrayer; not far from whose remains were then deposited
the blighted beauty of her whom he had loved only to destroy.




CHAPTER XI.


With its architect, fell that surprising fabric of fraud and wrong, the
rise and fall of which are commemorated in this history--a fabric which,
if it had "risen like an exhalation," so like an exhalation had
disappeared, and with it all the creatures which had peopled it. Though
Mr. Runnington's vigilance and ability had set matters into such a
train, that, had Mr. Gammon lived to continue his most skilful
opposition, he could not have delayed for any considerable length of
time Mr. Aubrey's restoration to Yatton, yet the sudden and most
unexpected death of Mr. Gammon greatly accelerated that event.
Notwithstanding the verdict of the coroner's inquest, both Mr. Aubrey
and Mr. Runnington--and in fact very many others--strongly suspected the
true state of the case; viz. that, in the desperation of defeat and
dreaded exposure, he had destroyed himself.

Towards the close of the term, Mr. Runnington went to the proper office
of the Court of King's Bench, in order to ascertain whether Mr. Titmouse
had taken the requisite steps towards defending the actions of ejectment
commenced by Mr. Aubrey, and found that, though the prescribed period
had elapsed, he had not; in other words, that he had "SUFFERED JUDGMENT
BY DEFAULT." Delighted, though not much surprised by this discovery, Mr.
Runnington resolved at once to follow up his victory. 'Twas only a short
and simple process that was requisite to effect such great results. He
took a single sheet of draft paper on which he wrote some half-dozen
lines called an "_incipitur_," as if he were going to copy out the
"declaration" in ejectment, but stopped short about the fifth line. This
sheet of paper, together with another containing his "Rule for
Judgment," he took to the Master's office, in order that that
functionary might "SIGN JUDGMENT"--which he did by simply writing in the
margin of what Mr. Runnington had written, the words--"_Judgment signed,
23d November 18--,_" then impressing above it the seal of the court; and
behold, at that instant, the _property_ in the whole of the Yatton
estates had become vested in Mr. Aubrey again!

The next step requisite was to secure the _possession_ of the property;
for which purpose Mr. Runnington immediately procured a WRIT OF
POSSESSION, (_i.e._ a writ requiring the sheriff of Yorkshire to put Mr.
Aubrey into actual possession,) to be engrossed on a slip of parchment.
This he got sealed; and then obtained a WARRANT from the sheriff to his
officers, to execute the writ. Now the sheriff might, had it been
necessary, have roused--nay, was bound to do so--the whole _posse
comitatus_, in order to compel submission to his authority; and I can
assure the reader that the whole _posse comitatus_ would have answered
his summons on that occasion very eagerly--but it was needless. Who was
there to resist him at Yatton? The transference of the possession became
under these circumstances a very slight matter-of-fact affair, and went
off in this wise. The under-sheriff of Yorkshire drove up in his gig to
the Hall, where he found Mr. Parkinson waiting his arrival--(no breaking
open of doors was necessary!)--and in a word or two, informed Mr.
Parkinson, with a smile, that he then delivered the possession to him
for and on account of Charles Aubrey, Esquire, his heirs and assigns,
forever--and after remarking, "what a fine estate it was, and in very
good order, _considering_," he drove off. I may add, that to save the
useless expense of some hundred writs of possession, "_attornments_"
were taken from all the tenants--_i. e._ written acknowledgments that
they held under Charles Aubrey, Esquire, as their sole, true, and proper
landlord. This done, that gentleman was reinstated in all that he had
been dispossessed of, as absolutely, and to all intents and purposes, as
if the events of the last three years had been but a _dream_--as if such
persons as Tittlebat Titmouse, and Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, had never
existed; and Mr. Griffiths the steward, and Mr. Parkinson, by way of
commemorating the event, opened a couple of bottles of port-wine, which,
with the efficient assistance of Mr. Waters and Mr. Dickons, the upper
and under bailiffs, Tonson the gamekeeper, and Pumpkin the gardener,
were very quickly emptied amid shouts--in which 'tis hoped the
good-natured reader will join--of "Hip, hip, hip, hurrah!--Hip, hip,
hip, _hurrah_!--Hip, hip, hip, _hurrah_! _hurrah!_ HURRAH!" Then
phlegmatic Mr. Dickons stepped out into the court-yard, and, by way of
further relieving his excited feelings, flung his heavy ashen
walking-stick up a surprising height into the air; and when he had
caught it on its descent, as he grasped it in his huge horny hand in
silence, he shook it above his head with the feeling that he could have
smashed a million of Titmice in a minute, if he could have got among
them. Then he thought of Mrs. Aubrey and Kate, and up went the stick
again, higher even than before--by which time they had all come out into
the yard, and shouted again, and again, and again, till their voices
rang and echoed in the air, and raised an uproar in the rookery behind
them.

While this result of his triumphant exertions was being thus celebrated
at Yatton, Mr. Runnington was stirring himself to the utmost in London,
in order to extricate Mr. Aubrey from all his pecuniary
embarrassments--the chief of which were, his two promissory notes for
£5,000 each, with interest, and the actions depending upon them--the
joint bond of himself and Lord De la Zouch for £10,000 and interest--and
the action pending for the balance of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's
bill--viz. £1,446, 14s. 6d. Undoubtedly, these matters occasioned him a
vast deal of trouble and anxiety; but his experienced tact, and
vigilance, and determination, overcame all obstacles. The balance of
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's abominable bill of costs, melted away
and totally disappeared in the heat of the taxing-office; and with the
aid of certain summary applications, both to the Lord Chancellor and to
the common-law judges, and after a good deal of diplomacy, Mr.
Runnington succeeded in getting into his hands, cancelled, the
above-mentioned two notes, on payment to Mr. Spitfire, for and on
account of Mr. Titmouse, of £250, (of which Mr. Titmouse, by the way,
got £15, the remainder being claimed by Spitfire in respect of costs.)
The bond for ten thousand pounds, which was found in the strong box of
the late Mr. Gammon, was delivered up by Messrs. Quirk and Snap, on
certain hints being given them by Mr. Runnington of the serious
consequences of refusal. Not satisfied with this, Mr. Runnington
obtained from Mr. Titmouse a formal and solemn release and discharge, to
Mr. Aubrey, his heirs, executors, and administrators, of all claims,
debts, damages, sums of money, demands, costs, charges, bills, bonds,
notes, accounts, reckonings, expenses, judgments, executions, actions,
and suits whatsoever, either at law or in equity. But how stood the
matter of Mr. Titmouse's liabilities to Mr. Aubrey, in respect of the
mesne profits during the last two years and more? Why, he owed Mr.
Aubrey a sum of some twenty-five thousand pounds--not one farthing
of which would ever see its way into the pockets of him who had
been so cruelly defrauded of it! The greatest trouble of Mr.
Runnington, however, was the extorting of the Yatton title-deeds
from the three Jews, Mordecai Gripe, Israel Fang, and Mephibosheth
Maharshalal-hash-baz. Unhappy wretches! they writhed and gasped as
though their very hearts were being torn out; but they had no help for
it, as their own attorneys and solicitors told them; since the right of
Mr. Aubrey to his title-deeds was as clear and indisputable as his right
to the estates, and their resistance of his claim would only entail on
them additional, very serious, and fruitless expense. They grinned,
chattered, stuttered, and stamped about in impotent but horrible fury;
and, if they could, would have torn Mr. Gammon out of his grave, and
placed his body, and those of Messrs. Quirk and Snap, over a slow fire!

These gentlemen, were not, however, the only persons who had been
astounded, dismayed, and defeated, by Mr. Gammon's _leap into the dark_.
To say nothing of Mr. Wigley, who might now whistle for his debt and
costs, and many other persons who had rested all their hopes upon Mr.
Gammon's powers, and his responsibility, his sudden death precipitated
total ruin upon his weak aristocratical dupe and victim, the poor old
Earl of Dreddlington. In addition to the formidable movement against the
earl and Mr. Gammon in the Court of Chancery, on the part of their
co-shareholders and adventurers, for the purpose of securing them to be
declared alone liable for all the debts contracted by the Gunpowder and
Fresh Water Company, the creditors, rendered impatient and desperate by
the sudden death of Mr. Gammon, began to attempt daily to harass the
unfortunate earl with their personal importunity for payment of their
demands, and that at his residence in Grosvenor Square and at Poppleton
Hall. At the former they were, of course, uniformly encountered by the
answer that his Lordship was both ill and out of town. Upon that, down
to his Lordship's nearest country residence--viz. Poppleton--went the
chief of his infuriate creditors, not believing the answer they had
received at his Lordship's town-house; but at Poppleton, the earl was
of course denied to them, and with a peremptoriness of manner, which,
excited as they were, they converted into insolence and defiance, and a
determined _denial_ to his Lordship's creditors. Upon this, they took
the opinion of counsel upon three points. _First_, whether a peer of the
realm could be made a bankrupt if he became a trader; _Secondly_,
whether the Earl of Dreddlington's active connection with the Gunpowder
and Fresh Water Company constituted him a trader within the meaning of
the bankrupt laws; and _Lastly_, whether the facts stated amounted to an
act of bankruptcy. To this it was answered--_First_, that a peer could
clearly be made a bankrupt if he traded, as an Earl of Suffolk had been
declared a bankrupt by reason of an act of bankruptcy committed by him
in buying and selling of wines, (per Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, in _ex
parte_ Meymot, 1 Atkyn's Reports, p. 201.) _Secondly_, that the
Gunpowder and Fresh Water Company was one of such a nature as
constituted its members "traders" within the meaning of the bankrupt
laws. _Thirdly_, that the facts stated showed the committing of an act
of bankruptcy, on the part of the Earl of Dreddlington, by "_beginning
to keep his house_." Upon this, the more eager and reckless of his
Lordship's creditors instantly struck a docket against him: and
thereupon, down came the messenger of the court to take possession of
his Lordship's houses and effects, both Grosvenor Square, Poppleton
Hall, and in Cornwall, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland--that is, as to the
last four, if he could discover them. At Poppleton he was sternly
refused admission; on which he produced his authority, and protested
that, if further denied, he would immediately proceed to effect an
entrance by main force, come what might, and those within must take the
consequences!--After a brief affrighted pause on the part of those
within, he was admitted--and immediately declared himself to be in
possession, under the bankruptcy, and by the authority of the Lord
Chancellor, of the premises, and everything upon them; at the same time
announcing to the dismayed inmates, that he would do nothing to give the
slightest annoyance, or occasion apprehensions to the noble bankrupt
personally. This very unusual occurrence found its way into the
newspapers of the next day, which brought, accidentally, under the
notice of Mr. Aubrey, the lamentable condition of his haughty yet fallen
kinsman. He hurried off in alarm and agitation to Mr. Runnington, and
requested him immediately to put himself into communication with the
earl's solicitor, whoever he might be, with a view to saving him, if
possible, from the indignity and ruin with which he was threatened; and
then himself drove down to Poppleton, to tender his services in any way
that might appear most desirable. He was shocked indeed at finding the
house, and everything in it, in formal possession of the bankruptcy
messenger; but much more so, on learning the deplorable condition of the
earl personally. It appeared that he had most unfortunately witnessed,
during a brief lucid interval, and while he was being assisted out of
his carriage on his return from an airing, the arrival of the messenger,
and his altercation with the servants at the door; and that, on being
made acquainted with the true nature of the proceeding, he staggered
back into the arms of Miss Macspleuchan, and was soon afterwards seized
with another fit of paralysis. All this Mr. Aubrey, on his arrival,
learned from Miss Macspleuchan--whom he knew only by name--and who
communicated the dismal tidings in an agony of grief and agitation. The
physician and apothecary were with the earl when Mr. Aubrey arrived; and
finding that he could render no personal service to his suffering
kinsman, he returned to town, assuring Miss Macspleuchan that she would
see him again on the morrow--and that he would, in the mean while, do
all in his power to avert from the earl the immediate effects of his
fearful imprudence. Faithful to his promise, he instructed Mr.
Runnington to do everything in reason to rescue the earl, and, in his
person, the honor of the family, from the impending misfortune. 'Twas,
however, all in vain. Two days afterwards, and before Mr. Runnington had
acted upon the instructions given to him by Mr. Aubrey, the latter
received intelligence by express from Poppleton, that the earl was in
dying circumstances; that he was conscious of his rapidly approaching
end; and was understood to have expressed a wish to see Mr. Aubrey
before he died. When he arrived, he was at once ushered into the earl's
bedchamber, and found the Duke of Tantallan sitting on one side of the
bed, and Miss Macspleuchan on the other; she was weeping in silence, and
her left hand was grasped between the thin white hands of the earl,
whose face was turned towards her. His snow-white hair and wasted
features, and the expression of mingled misery, feebleness, and
affection that were in his eyes, fixed heavily upon Miss Macspleuchan,
filled Mr. Aubrey with deep emotion. The earl seemed a mere skeleton!
Shortly after Mr. Aubrey had entered the room, Miss Macspleuchan leaned
down to the earl's ear, and, in a whisper, informed him of Mr. Aubrey's
arrival. He did not seem at first to have heard, or at least
comprehended, what she had said; but, a few moments afterwards, opened
his eyes a little wider than they had been before, and his lips quivered
as if with an effort at speaking. Then he very feebly extended both his
thin arms towards Miss Macspleuchan, who was still leaning over him, and
placed them tremblingly round her neck, from which, however, in a moment
or two, they suddenly fell; the lower jaw also fell; the poor earl was
dead--and Miss Macspleuchan, with a faint sigh, sank back in a swoon
into the arms of the nurse who stood beside her, and who, assisted by a
female attendant, immediately removed her from the room. The Duke of
Tantallan remained sitting where he was, but with his face averted, and
his right hand clasping one of the hands of his deceased kinsman: and
Mr. Aubrey continued standing at the foot of the bed, his eyes covered
by his hand. Neither of them spoke for some time. At length the duke,
very deeply affected, slowly rose, and quitted the chamber in silence,
followed by Mr. Aubrey, as those entered who were to commence the last
sad offices for the dead.

The duke undertook all the arrangements for the funeral; and after much
melancholy conversation with his Grace concerning the shocking state in
which the earl had left his affairs, and having offered to provide,
should it be necessary, for Miss Macspleuchan, Mr. Aubrey took his
departure.

"Is the carriage at the door?" he inquired of the servant who stood in
the hall expecting his approach.

"Yes, my Lord," he replied; and his words caused LORD DRELINCOURT almost
to start back a step or two; and he changed color. Then he entered his
carriage, and continued in a very melancholy and subdued mood during the
whole of the drive up to town. He had, indeed, now become Lord
Drelincourt--an event thus announced the next morning to the great
world, in the columns of the obsequious _Aurora_.

     "Yesterday, at his residence, Poppleton Hall, Hertfordshire, in his
     seventieth year, died the Right Hon. the Earl of Dreddlington,
     G.C.B., F.C.S., &c. &c. His Lordship was Fifth Earl of
     Dreddlington, and Twentieth BARON DRELINCOURT. The Earldom (created
     in 1667) is now extinct; but his Lordship is succeeded in the
     ancient barony of Drelincourt (created by writ, 12th Henry II.) by
     CHARLES AUBREY, Esq. of Yatton, in Yorkshire, the representative of
     the younger branch of the family, who is now 21st Lord Drelincourt,
     and has just succeeded in establishing his title to the whole of
     the Yatton property, which about two years ago, it may be
     remembered, was recovered in a very extraordinary manner (which is
     now, we believe, the subject of judicial inquiry) by Tittlebat
     Titmouse, Esq., at present M.P. for Yatton. His Lordship (who is
     now in his thirty-sixth year) took a double first-class at Oxford,
     and sat for several years as member for Yatton. He married, in
     18--, Agnes, sole daughter and heiress of the late Colonel St.
     Clair, who fell in the Peninsular war, and has issue by her
     Ladyship two children, Charles, born in 18--, and Agnes, born in
     18--. His Lordship has no brothers, and only one sister, Miss
     Catharine Aubrey, who is understood to be affianced to the Hon. Mr.
     Delamere, the only son and heir of the Right Hon. Lord De la
     Zouch."

Till Yatton could be got ready for their reception, they had taken, as a
temporary residence, a furnished house in Dover Street, only a few
doors' distance from that of Lord De la Zouch; and on his arrival from
Poppleton Hall, Lord Drelincourt found Lady Drelincourt and his sister
had not yet returned from their afternoon's drive. When they drew up to
the door, however, the closed shutters and drawn blinds apprised them of
the melancholy event which had taken place. On hearing that Lord
Drelincourt was alone in the drawing-room, where he had been for upwards
of an hour, they rushed hastily up-stairs, and in a few moments Lord and
Lady Drelincourt had fondly embraced each other, and Miss Aubrey, full
of eager affection, had embraced both of them; and then, quitting the
room, quickly returned with Charles and Agnes, now--little unconscious
creatures!--the Honorable Charles and Honorable Agnes Aubrey. Surely it
was not to be expected that any of them should entertain very poignant
feelings of sorrow for the death of an individual who had ever totally
estranged himself from them, and treated every member of their family
with the most offensive and presumptuous insolence--with the bitterest
contempt; who, when he knew that they were destitute and all but
perishing, had kept cruelly aloof as ever, without once extending
towards them a helping hand. Still they had regarded the afflicting
circumstances which attended, and hastened, their lofty kinsman's death,
with sincere commiseration for one so weak and misguided, and whose
pride had had, indeed, so signal and fearful a fall. These were topics
which afforded scope for sad but instructive conversation and
reflection; and before Lord and Lady Drelincourt had laid their heads on
their pillows that night, they again devoutly returned thanks to Heaven
for the happy restoration which had been vouchsafed to _them_, and
offered sincere and fervent prayers for its guidance in every stage of
their future career.

This event, of course, threw them again, for a time, into mourning. Lord
Drelincourt attended the funeral of the late earl, which took place at
Poppleton, and was plain and private; and a few days afterwards,
yearning to see Yatton once again, and anxious also to give his personal
directions concerning very many matters which required them, he accepted
an offer of a seat in the carriage of Lord De la Zouch, who was going
down for a few days to Fotheringham on business of importance. Lord
Drelincourt agreed to take up his abode at Fotheringham during his brief
stay in Yorkshire, and to give no one at Yatton a previous intimation of
his intention to pay a visit to them--purposing, the morning after his
arrival at Fotheringham, to ride over quietly, alone and unexpectedly,
to the dear place of his birth, and scene of such signal trials and
expected joys of restoration and reunion.

'Twas about four o'clock in the afternoon of a frosty day in the early
part of December; and Dr. Tatham was sitting alone in his
plainly-furnished and old-fashioned little study, beside the table on
which Betty, his old housekeeper, had just laid his scanty show of
tea-things--the small, quaintly-figured round silver tea-pot having been
the precious gift, more than twenty years before, of old Madam Aubrey.
On his knee lay open a well-worn parchment-covered Elzevir edition of
_Thomas à Kempis_, a constant companion of the doctor's, which he had
laid down a few moments before, in a fit of musing--and was gazing in
the direction of the old yew-tree, a portion of which, with a gray
crumbling corner of his church, at only some two dozen yards' distance,
was visible through the window. On one side of his book-shelves hung his
surplice on one peg, and on another his gown; and on the other his rusty
shovel-hat and walking-stick. Over the mantelpiece were suspended two
small black profile likenesses of old Squire Aubrey and Madam Aubrey,
which they had themselves presented to the doctor nearly thirty years
before. Though it was very cold, there was but a handful of fire in the
little grate; and this, together with the modicum of brown sugar in the
sugar-basin, and about two small spoonfuls of tea, which he had just
before measured out of his little tea-caddy, into the cup, in order to
be ready to put it into his tea-pot, when Betty should have brought in
the kettle--and four thin slices of scantily buttered brown bread--all
this, I say, seemed touching evidence of the straitened circumstances in
which the poor doctor was placed. His clothes, too, very clean, very
threadbare, and of a very rusty hue--down even to his gaiters--suggested
the same reflection to the beholder. The five pounds which he had
scraped together for purchasing a new suit, Mr. Titmouse, it will be
remembered, had succeeded in cheating him out of. His hair was of a
silvery white; and though he was evidently a little cast down in
spirits, the expression of his countenance was as full of benevolence
and piety as ever. He was, moreover, considerably thinner than when he
was last presented to the reader; and well he might be, for he had
since undergone great privation and anxiety. He--_he_, peaceful
unoffending old soul!--had long been followed with pertinacious
bitterness and persecution by two new inhabitants of the village; viz.
the Rev. Smirk Mudflint and Mr. Bloodsuck, junior. The former had
obtained a lease from Mr. Titmouse of the little structure which had
formerly been Miss Aubrey's school, and had turned it into an Unitarian
chapel--himself and family residing in part of the building. He preached
every Sunday _at_ Dr. Tatham, turning his person, his habits, his
office, and his creed into bitter ridicule; and repeatedly challenging
him, from his pulpit, to an open discussion of the points in difference
between them! By means of his "moral" discourses every Sunday morning,
and his "political" discourses every Sunday evening--and which he used
all his powers to render palatable to those who heard him--he was
undoubtedly seducing away many of the parishioners from the parish
church; a matter which began visibly to prey upon the doctor's spirits.
Then Mr. Bloodsuck, too, was carrying on the campaign briskly against
the parson--against whom he had got a couple of actions pending at the
suit of parishioners, in respect of his right to certain tithes which
had never before been questioned by any one. Only that very day the
impudent jackanapes--for that, I am sure, you would have pronounced Mr.
Barnabas Bloodsuck at first sight--had sent a very peremptory and
offensive letter to the doctor, which had been designed by its writer to
have the effect of drawing him into a sudden compromise; whereas the
doctor, with a just sense and spirit, had resolved never in any way to
suffer his rights, and those of his successors, to be infringed. Many
and many a weary walk to Mr. Parkinson's office at Grilston had these
persecuting proceedings of Bloodsuck's cost the doctor, and also
considerable and unavoidable expense, which, had he been in any other
hands than those of good Mr. Parkinson, must by this time have involved
the doctor in utter ruin, and broken his heart. Still generous according
to his means, the good soul had, on his last visit to Grilston,
purchased and brought home with him a couple of bottles of port-wine,
which he intended to take on Christmas-day to the poor brother parson in
an adjoining parish, to whom I alluded in the early part of this
history. All these matters might well occasion Dr. Tatham anxiety, and
frequent fits of despondency, such as that under which he was suffering,
when he heard a gentle tapping at his door, while sitting in his study
as I have described him. "Come in, Betty," quoth the doctor, in his
usual kind and quiet way, supposing it to be his old housekeeper with
his tea-kettle; for she had gone with it a few minutes before across the
yard to the well, leaving the front door ajar till her return. As he
uttered the words above-mentioned, the door opened. He sat with his back
towards it; and finding, after a pause, that no one entered or spoke, he
turned round in his chair to see the reason why; and beheld a gentleman
standing there, dressed in deep mourning, and gazing at him with an
expression of infinite tenderness and benignity. The doctor was a little
of a believer in the reality of spiritual appearances; and, taken quite
off his guard, jumped out of his chair, and, stared for a second or two
in mute amazement, if not even apprehension, at the figure standing
silently in the doorway.

"Why! Bless--bless my soul--can it be"--he stammered, and the next
instant perceived that it was indeed, as I may say, the _desire of his
eyes_--Mr. Aubrey, now become, as the doctor had a few days before heard
from Mr. Parkinson, Lord Drelincourt.

"Oh my dear, old, revered friend! Do I see you once again?" exclaimed
his Lordship, in a tremulous voice, as he stepped hastily up to the
doctor, with his arms extended, and, grasping the hand of the doctor
with vehement pressure, they both gazed at each other for some moments
in silence, and with the tears in their eyes--Lord Drelincourt's soul
touched within him by the evident alteration which had taken place in
Dr. Tatham's appearance.

"And is it indeed true, my dear friend?" at length faltered the doctor,
still gazing fondly at Lord Drelincourt.

"It _is_ your old friend, Charles Aubrey! dearest doctor! God bless you,
revered friend and instructor of my youth!" said Lord Drelincourt, with
a full heart and a quivering lip: "I am come, you see, once more to
Yatton, and first of all to you; and in your presence to acknowledge the
goodness of God, for He has been very good to me!"

"The Lord God of thy fathers bless thee!" exclaimed Dr. Tatham,
solemnly; and Lord Drelincourt reverently received the benison. A few
moments afterwards he sat down, opposite the doctor, in the only spare
chair there was in the room, and they were instantly engaged in eager
and affectionate converse.

"Why, Mr. Aubrey," quoth the doctor, with a smile, but also a slight
embarrassment, "I had forgotten--Lord Drelincourt, how strangely it
sounds!"

"Yes, it is true, such is now my name; but, believe me, I am not yet
reconciled to it, especially, dearest doctor, in your presence! Shall I
ever be as happy as Lord Drelincourt as I have been as Charles Aubrey?"

"Ay, ay, dear friend, to be sure you will! 'Tis in the course of God's
providence that you are raised to distinction, as well as restored to
that which is your own! Long may you live to enjoy both! and, I hope,
_at Yatton_," he added earnestly.

"Oh, can you doubt it, dearest doctor? My heart is only now recovering
the wounds it received in being torn from this dear spot!"

"And Mrs. Au--I mean Lady Drelincourt. God Almighty bless her! and
Kate--sweet, dear Kate! Well! _She_ has not changed her name yet, I
suppose?"

"Not _yet_," replied Lord Drelincourt, with a cheerful smile.

"And do you mean to say that you are all coming to old Yatton again?"
inquired the doctor, rubbing his hands.

"Coming to Yatton again? 'Tis a little paradise to all of us! Here we
wish to live; and when we follow those who have gone before us, _there_
we wish to rest!" said Lord Drelincourt, solemnly, and he pointed
towards the churchyard, with a look that suddenly filled the doctor's
eyes with tears, for it brought full before them the funeral of Mrs.
Aubrey.

"I have something for you," said Lord Drelincourt, after a pause, taking
out his pocket-book, "from my wife and sister, who charged me to give it
into your own hands with their fervent love;" and he gave two letters
into the doctor's hands, which trembled with emotion as he received
them.

"I shall read them by-and-by, when I am alone," said he, as, gazing
fondly at the superscriptions, he placed the two letters on the
mantelpiece.

"Come in! come in!" quoth the doctor, quickly, hearing a knocking at the
door--"that's Betty. You have not forgotten old Betty, have you?" said
he to Lord Drelincourt, as the good old woman opened the door in a
flustered manner, with the kettle in her hands, and dropped an awful
courtesy on seeing Lord Drelincourt, whom she instantly recognized.

"Well, Betty," said he, with infinite cordiality, "I am glad to see you
again, and to hear that you are well!"

"Yes, sir!--if you please, sir!--thank you, sir!" stammered Betty,
courtesying repeatedly, and standing, with the kettle in her hand, as if
she did not intend to come in with it.

"That will do, Betty," quoth the doctor, looking delighted at Lord
Drelincourt's good-natured greeting of his faithful old servant; "bring
it in! And Thomas is quite well, too," he added, turning to Lord
Drelincourt--Thomas being Betty's husband--and both of whom had lived
with the doctor for some eighteen or twenty years--Thomas's business
being to look after the doctor's nag while he kept one, and now to do
odd jobs about the little garden and paddock. After one or two kind
inquiries about him, "I must join you, Doctor--if you please," said Lord
Drelincourt, as Betty put the kettle on the fire; "you'll give me a cup
of tea"----

"A cup of tea? Ay, to be sure! Betty! here," said he, beckoning her to
him, and whispering to her to bring out the best tea-things, and to run
out into the village for a couple of tea-cakes, and a little more tea,
and some eggs and butter, and half a pound of lump sugar--for the doctor
was bent upon doing the thing splendidly, on so great an occasion; but
Lord Drelincourt, who overheard him, and who had asked to take tea with
him only that he might not delay the doctor's doing so--(for Lord
Drelincourt had not yet dined)--interposed, declaring that if anything
of the sort were done, he would leave immediately; adding, that he
expected his horses at the door every moment, and also that Lord De la
Zouch (who had come over with him from Fotheringham, and had come down
to the Hall) would presently call to join him on his way home. This
secured Lord Drelincourt's wishes, and you might within a few minutes'
time have seen him partaking of the doctor's humble beverage, while they
continued in eager and earnest conversation. Lord Drelincourt had that
morning had a very long interview with Mr. Parkinson, from whom he had
learned the life of persecution which the poor doctor had led for the
last two years--listening to it with the keenest indignation. The doctor
himself softened down matters a good deal in the account which _he_ gave
Lord Drelincourt--but his Lordship saw at once that the case had not
been in the least overstated by Mr. Parkinson; and, without intimating
anything of his intentions to the doctor, resolved upon forthwith taking
certain steps which, had they known them, would have made two
conspicuous persons in the village shake in their shoes.

"What's that, Doctor?" suddenly inquired Lord Drelincourt, hearing a
noise as of shouting outside. Now, the fact was, that the appearance of
Lord Drelincourt, and Lord De la Zouch, and their two grooms, as they
galloped down the village on their way to the Hall, (from which Lord
Drelincourt, as I have stated, had walked to the vicarage, whither he
was to be followed by Lord De la Zouch,) had created a pretty sensation
in the neighborhood; for Lord Drelincourt, rapidly as he rode in, was
soon recognized by those who were about, and the news spread like
wildfire that "my Lord the squire" had come back, and was then at
Yatton--a fact which seemed to be anything but gratifying to Messrs.
Bloodsuck and Mudflint, who were talking together, at the moment when
Lord Drelincourt asked the question of Dr. Tatham, at the door of Mr.
Mudflint, whose face seemed to have got several degrees sallower within
a quarter of an hour, while Mr. Bloodsuck looked quite white. There was
a continually increasing crowd about the front of the vicarage; and as
they got more and more assured of the fact that Lord Drelincourt was at
that moment with Dr. Tatham, they began to shout "hurrah!" So----

"What's that?" inquired Lord Drelincourt.

"Ah!--I know!" cried the doctor, with not a little excitement; "they've
found you out, bless them!--hark!--I have not heard such a thing I don't
know how long--I wonder they don't set the bells a-ringing!--Why, bless
me! there's a couple of hundred people before the door!" exclaimed he,
after having stepped into the front room, and reconnoitred through the
window. Though the gloom of evening was rapidly deepening, Lord
Drelincourt also perceived the great number that had collected together,
and his eye having caught the approaching figure of Lord De la Zouch,
for whom, and the grooms, the crowd made way, he prepared to leave. Lord
De la Zouch dismounted, and, entering the vicarage, shook hands with the
utmost cordiality with the little doctor, whom he invited to dine and
sleep at Fotheringham on the morrow, promising to send the carriage for
him. The little doctor scarce knew whether he stood on his head or his
heels, in the flurry of the moment; and when he and Lord Drelincourt
appeared at the door, and a great shout burst from those present, it was
with difficulty that he could resist his inclination to join in it. It
was growing late, however, and they had a long ride before them: so Lord
Drelincourt, having stood for some moments bareheaded and bowing to all
around, and shaking hands with those who pressed nearest, following the
example of Lord De la Zouch, mounted his horse, and waving his hand
affectionately to Dr. Tatham, rode off amid the renewed cheers of the
crowd. From that moment worthy little Dr. Tatham had regained all his
former ascendency at Yatton!

As the two peers sat together over their wine that evening, the fate of
the Rev. Mr. Mudflint, and Barnabas Bloodsuck, junior, "gentleman, &c.,"
was sealed. The more that they talked together about the wanton and
bitter insult and persecution which those worthies had so long
inflicted, upon one, surely, of the most inoffensive, peaceable, and
benevolent beings upon the earth, Dr. Tatham, the higher rose their
indignation, the sterner their determination to punish and remove his
enemies. The next morning Lord De la Zouch wrote up to town, directing
instructions to be given to Mr. Winnington, who had conducted the
proceedings in the actions of Wigley _v._ Mudflint, and Wigley _v._
Bloodsuck, to issue execution forthwith. Lord Drelincourt also did his
part. Almost every house in the village was his property, and he
instructed Mr. Parkinson immediately to take steps towards summarily
ejecting the two aforesaid worthies from the premises they were
respectively occupying--convinced that by so doing he was removing two
principal sources of filth and mischief from the village and
neighborhood; for they were the founders and most active members of a
sort of spouting-club for radical and infidel speechifying, and which
club their presence and influence alone kept together.

Early the next morning Lord Drelincourt returned to the Hall, having
appointed several persons to meet him there, on business principally
relating to the restoration of the Hall to its former state, as far as
was practicable; at all events, to render it fit for the reception of
the family within as short a period as possible. According to an
arrangement he had made before quitting town, he found, on reaching the
Hall, a gentleman from London, of great taste and experience, to whose
hands was to be intrusted the entire superintendence of the contemplated
reparations and restorations, both internal and external, regard being
had to the antique and peculiar character of the mansion--it being his
Lordship's anxious wish that Lady Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey, on their
return, should see it, as nearly as might be, in the condition in which
they had left it. Fortunately, the little Vandal who had just been
expelled from it had done little or no permanent or substantial injury.
There was the same great irregular mass of old brickwork, with its huge
stacks of chimneys, just as they had ever known it, only requiring a
little pointing. That fine old relic, the castellated gateway, clad in
ivy, with its gray, crumbling, stone-capped battlements, and escutcheon
over the point of the arch, had suffered no change; even the quaint,
weather-beaten sun-dial stood in the centre of the grass-plot, within
the court-yard, as they had left it. The yew-trees still lined the high
walls which surrounded the court-yard; and the fine old clump of cedars
of Lebanon was there--green, stately, and solemn, as in days of yore.
The moment, however, that you passed the threshold of the Hall, you
sighed at the change that had taken place. Where were now the armed
figures, the pikes, bows, guns, spears, swords, and battle-axes, and the
quaint old pictures of the early ancestors of the family of the Aubreys?
Not a trace to be seen of them; and it gave Lord Drelincourt a pang as
his eye travelled round the bare walls. But the case was not desperate.
All the aforesaid pictures still lay rolled up in the lumber-room, where
they had continued as articles utterly valueless ever since Mr. Titmouse
had ordered them to be taken down. They had been brought from their
obscurity, and now lay on the floor, having been carefully unrolled and
examined by the man of taste, who undertook quickly to remove the
incipient ravage of mould and dirt at present visible, and to have them
suspended in their former position, in such a state as that only the
closest scrutiny could detect any difference between their present and
former condition. The other relics of antiquity--viz. the armor--had
been purchased by the late Lady Stratton at one of the sales of
Titmouse's effects, occasioned by an execution against him, and they
still were at her late residence, and of course at Lord Drelincourt's
disposal, as her Ladyship's administrator. These, on his seeing them,
the man of taste pronounced to be very fine and valuable specimens of
old English armor, and undertook to have them also in their old places,
and in a far better condition even than before. Lord Drelincourt sighed
repeatedly as he went over every one of the bare and deserted rooms in
the mansion--nothing being left except the beautiful antique
mantelpieces of inlaid oak, and the oak-panelling of the different
apartments, which, as a part of the freehold, could not be seized as the
personal property of Mr. Titmouse. His creditors had swept off, from
time to time, everything that had belonged to him. The hall, the
dining-room, breakfast-room, drawing-rooms, the library, the bedrooms,
dressing-rooms, boudoirs of Mrs. Aubrey and his sister, the long
galleries, the rooms in which Charles and Agnes used to romp and play
about--were all now bare and desolate, and the echoes of their footfalls
and voices, in passing through them, struck Lord Drelincourt's heart
with sadness. But all this was to be easily and quickly remedied; for a
_carte blanche_ was given to the man of taste at his elbow, who
undertook within two, or at most three months' time, to leave nothing
for the eye or the heart to sigh for--guided, moreover, as all his
movements would be, by those who were so deeply interested in their
success. On reaching the two rooms in the north-eastern extremities of
the building, the windows of which commanded a view of nearly
three-fourths of the estate, he gazed around him in silence,--one which
those beside him thoroughly appreciated. _There_ was nothing to shock
the eye or pain the heart; for as Mr. Titmouse had been restrained from
cutting timber, behold! what a sight would be seen when, in the
approaching spring, the groves and forests, stretching far and wide
before him, should have put on all their bravery! And he found on
inquiry, and going over a portion of the grounds, that Mr. Waters and
Dickons had kept pretty sharp eyes about them, and maintained everything
in infinitely better condition than could have been expected. Mr. Tonson
had, moreover, looked very keenly after the game; and Pumpkin undertook,
by spring-time, to make his gardens and greenhouses a sight delightful
to behold. In a word, Lord Drelincourt left everything under the
management of the London man of taste and of Mr. Griffiths, the former
being guided, of course, in the purchase of the leading articles of
furniture in town, from time to time, by the tastes of Lord and Lady
Drelincourt, and Miss Aubrey. Mr. Griffiths was desired to re-engage as
many of the former servants of Mr. Aubrey as he could; and informed Lord
Drelincourt of two, in particular, who had signified their anxious wish
to him on the subject; viz. Mrs. Jackson, the housekeeper, who had lived
in that capacity with a brother of hers at York, on quitting the service
of Mrs. Aubrey. She was, of course, to be immediately reinstated in her
old place. The other was Harriet, Miss Aubrey's maid, who, it may be
recollected, was so disconsolate at being left behind by Miss Aubrey,
who had secured her a place at the late Lady Stratton's, at whose house
she still lived, with several of the other servants, the establishment
not having been yet finally broken up. The poor girl very nearly went
distracted with joy on receiving, a short time afterwards, an
intimation, that as soon as she had got her clothes in readiness, she
might set off for town, and enter at once upon her old duties as lady's
maid to Miss Aubrey. Finding, on inquiry, that there was not one single
tenant upon the estate, whose rent had not been raised above that which
had been paid in Mr. Aubrey's time, he ordered the rent of all to be
reduced to their former amount, and inquiries to be made after several
respectable tenants, whom the extortion of Mr. Titmouse and his agents
had driven from their farms, with a view of restoring them, in lieu of
their very questionable successors. Having thus set everything in train
for a restoration to the former happy and contented state of things
which prevailed at Yatton before the usurpation of Mr. Titmouse, Lord
Drelincourt returned to town; but first left a hundred pounds in Dr.
Tatham's hands, to be distributed as he thought proper among the poorer
villagers and neighbors on Christmas-eve; and also insisted on the
doctor's acceptance, himself, of fifty pounds in advance, on account of
his salary, a hundred a-year, as chaplain to Lord Drelincourt, which
appointment the doctor received from his Lordship's own hands, and with
not a little delight and pride. His Lordship, moreover, desired Mr.
Parkinson to hold him responsible for any little demand which might be
due from the poor doctor, in respect of the litigation in which he had
been involved; and thus Dr. Tatham was made a free man of again, with no
further question about his right to tithes, or any more of the
interruption of any of the sources of his little income, to which he had
lately been subjected; and with fifty pounds, moreover, at his absolute
disposal. The doctor made his appearance on Christmas-day in a very fine
suit of black, new hat and all, and had a very full attendance at
church, and, moreover, a very cheerful and attentive one.

A day or two after Lord Drelincourt's return to town, Messrs. Mudflint
and Bloodsuck received a very pressing invitation to York Castle, whose
hospitable owners would receive no refusal. In plain English, they were
both taken in execution on the same day, by virtue of two writs of
_capias ad satisfaciendum_, for the damages and costs due to Mr. Wigley;
viz. £2,960, 16s. 4d. from Smirk Mudflint, and £2,760, 19s. from
Barnabas Bloodsuck, junior. Poor Mr. Mudflint! In vain--in vain had
been his Sunday evenings' lectures for the last three months, on the
errors which pervaded all systems of jurisprudence which annexed any
pecuniary liabilities to political offences, instead of leaving the evil
to be redressed by the spontaneous good sense of society. A single tap
of the sheriff's officer on the eloquent lecturer's shoulder, upset all
his fine speculations; just as Corporal Trim said, that one shove of the
bayonet was worth all Dr. Slop's fine metaphysical discourses upon the
art of war!

In the next _Yorkshire Stingo_, (which, alas! between ourselves, was
very nearly on its last legs,) there appeared one of, I must own, the
most magnificent articles of the kind which I ever read, upon the
atrocious and unparalleled outrage on the liberties of the subject,
which had been committed in the incarceration of the two patriots--the
martyr-patriots--Mudflint and Bloodsuck. On that day, it said, the sun
of liberty had set on England forever--in fact, for it was a time for
speaking out--it had gone down in blood. The enlightened patriot,
Mudflint, had at length fallen before the combined forces of bigotry and
tyranny, which were now, in the shape of the Church of England and the
aristocracy, riding rough-shod over the necks of Englishmen. In his
person lay prostrate the sacred rights of conscience, and the
inalienable liberty of Englishmen. He had stood forth, nobly foremost,
in the fray between the people and their oppressors; and he had
fallen!--but he felt how _dulce et decorum_ it was, _pro patriâ mori_!
He felt prouder and happier in his bonds than could ever feel the
splendid fiend at F----m, in all his blood-stained magnificence! It then
called upon the people, in vivid and spirit-stirring language, to rise
against their tyrants like one man, and the days of their oppressors
were numbered; and stated that the first blow was already struck against
the black and monstrous fabric of priestcraft and tyranny; for that a
SUBSCRIPTION had been already opened on behalf of Mr. Mudflint and Mr.
Bloodsuck, for the purpose of discharging the amount of debt and costs
for which they had been so infamously deprived of their liberty. An
unprecedented sensation had--it seemed--been already excited; and a
reference to the advertising columns of their paper would show that the
work went bravely on. The friends of religious and civil liberty all
over the country were roused; they had but to continue their exertions,
and the majesty of the people would be heard in a voice of thunder. This
article produced an immense sensation in that part of York Castle where
the patriots were confined, and in the immediate neighborhood of the
office of the _Yorkshire Stingo_, (in fact, it had emanated from the
masterly pen of Mudflint himself.) Sure enough, on referring to the
advertising columns of the _Stingo_, the following did appear fully to
warrant the tone of indignant exultation indulged in by the editor:--

     Subscriptions already received (through C. Woodlouse) towards
     raising a fund for the liberation of the Reverend Smirk Mudflint
     and Barnabas Bloodsuck, junior, Esq., at present confined in York
     Castle.

     An ardent admirer of the talents and character
       of the Reverend Smirk Mudflint                    £200 0 0
     Several friends of the Rev. S. M                     150 0 0
     Anonymous                                            100 0 0
     John Brown, Esq.                                      50 0 0
     James Smith, Esq.                                     50 0 0
     John Jones, Esq.                                      50 0 0
     Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire, Bart.                   50 0 0

Now, to conceal nothing from the reader, I regret being obliged to
inform him that, with the exception of Sir H. R. Wildfire, Bart., the
above noble-spirited individuals, whom no one had ever heard of in or
near to Grilston, or, in fact, anywhere else, had their local
habitation and their name only in the fertile brain of the Rev. Mr.
Mudflint; who had hit upon this device as an effectual one for _getting
up the steam_, (to use a modern and significant expression,) and giving
that mighty impulse which was requisite to burst the bonds of the two
imprisoned patriots.

Sir Harkaway's name was in the list, to be sure, but that was on the
distinct understanding that he was not to be called on to _pay_ one
farthing; the bargain being, that if he would give the sanction of his
name to Messrs. Mudflint and Bloodsuck, they would allow him to have the
credit, _gratis_, of so nobly supporting the Liberal cause.

The following, however, were real and _bonâ fide_ names and
subscriptions collected, with immense exertion, during the ensuing three
weeks; and though, when annexed to the foregoing flourishing
commencement of the list, they give it, I must own, a somewhat tadpole
appearance, yet here they are:--

     Subscriptions already received                      £650  0  0
     Cephas Woodlouse, Esq.                                 1  1  0
     Barnabas Bloodsuck, Esq., senior                       1  1  0
     Gargle Glister, Esq.                                   0 10  0
     Going Gone, Esq.                                       0  7  0
     Simon Snooks, Esq.                                     0  5  0
     "Tyrants, beware!!"                                    0  2  6
     "One who is ready to ascend the scaffold, if required" 0  2  0
     "Behemoth"                                             0  1  6
     "A foe to priestcraft"                                 0  1  0
     "Britons NEVER shall be slaves!"                       0  0  9
     "Down with the aristocracy!"                           0  0  6
     "Free inquiry"                                         0  0  4
     "Brutus and Cassius"                                   0  0  4
     "Virtue in prison, _better than vice in a castle_"     0  0  3
     "Defiance!"                                            0  0  2
     Small sums                                             0  0  1-3/4
                                                           ------------
     Making a grand total of sums actually received
     by the editor of the _Yorkshire Stingo_, of           £3 13  5-3/4

Certainly this was "not as good as had been anticipated"--as the editor
subsequently owned in his leading article--and asked, with sorrowful
indignation, how the people could expect any one to be true to them if
they were not true to themselves! "Our cheeks," said he, "tingle with
shame on looking at the paltry list of additional contributions--'Oh,
lame and impotent conclusion' to so auspicious a commencement!"--This
was very fine indeed. It came very well from Mr. Woodlouse in his
_editorial_ capacity; but Mr. Woodlouse, in his capacity as a man of
business, was a very different person. Alas! that it should fell to my
lot to inquire, in my turn, with sorrowful indignation--was there NO
_honor among thieves_? But, to come to the point, it fell out in this
wise. Patriots must _live_, even in prison; and Mr. Mudflint, being
sorely pressed, wrote a letter to his "Dear Woodlouse," asking for the
amount of subscriptions received up to that date. He received, in
return, a most friendly note, addressed "My dear Mudflint," full of
civilities and friendly anxieties--hoping the air of the Castle agreed
with him--assuring him how he was missed from the Liberal circle, and
that he would be welcomed with open arms if ever he got
out--and--enclosing a nicely drawn out _debtor_ and _creditor account_!!
headed--

     The Rev. Smirk Mudflint and Barnabas Bloodsuck, Esq., in account
     with Cephas Woodlouse, [in which every farthing of the above
     sum of £3, 13s. 5-3/4d. was faithfully set down to the _credit_ side,
     to be sure; but, alas!--on the DEBIT side stood the following!]--

     To advertising lists of Subscriptions in _Y. S._
       (three weeks)                                         £3 15 6
     To Circulars, Hand-bills, &c. (as per order)             2 13 9
     Postage and Sundries                                     0  4 3
                                                             ---------
                                                             £6 13 6
     By cash, amount of Subscriptions received                3 13 5-3/4
                                                             ---------
     Balance due to C. W                                     £3  0 0-1/4

On perusing the above document, so pregnant with perfidy and extortion,
Mr. Mudflint put it into his pocket, and, slipping off to his
sleeping-room, closed the door, took off his garters, and, with very
deadly intentions towards himself was tying them together--casting a
ghastly glance, occasionally, at a great hook in the wall, which he
could just reach by standing on a stool--when he was discovered, and
removed with his hands fastened behind him, "to the strong room," where
he was firmly attached to a heavy wooden bench, and left to his
meditations. Solitude and reflection restored the afflicted captive to
something like composure and resignation; and after meditating long and
deeply on the selfishness and worthlessness of worldly friendship, his
thoughts gradually turned towards a _better place_--a haven of
rest--viz. the Insolvent Debtors' Court.

The effect of this infamous treatment upon his fellow-captive,
Bloodsuck, was quite different. Having sworn one single prodigious oath,
he enclosed the above account, and sent it off to his father, in the
following pithy letter:--

                                       "_York Castle, Dec. 29, 18--_

     "DEAR FATHER,--Read the enclosed! and then _sell up
     Woodlouse_.--Your dutiful Son,

                                                 B. BLOODSUCK, Jun."

The old gentleman, on reading this laconic epistle, and its enclosure,
immediately issued execution against Woodlouse, on a cognovit of his for
£150, which he had given to the firm of Bloodsuck and Son for the
balance of a bill of theirs for defending him unsuccessfully against an
action for an infamous libel. Nobody would bid anything for his moribund
"_Stingo_;" he had no other effects, and was immediately taken in
execution, and sent to York Castle, where he, Bloodsuck, and Mudflint,
whenever they met, could hardly be restrained from tearing one
another's eyes out.

'Tis thus that reptiles of this sort prey upon each other!--To "begin
nothing of which you have not well considered the end," is a saying, the
propriety of which every one recognizes when he hears it enunciated, but
no one thinks of in the conduct of actual life; and what follows, will
illustrate the truth of my reflection. It seemed a capital notion of
Mudflint's to send forth such a splendid list of sham subscribers, and
it was natural enough for Mr. Bloodsuck to assent to it, and Mr.
Woodlouse to become the party to it which he did--but who could have
foreseen the consequences? A quarrel among rogues is almost always
attended with ugly and unexpected consequences to themselves. Now, here
was a mortal feud between Mr. Woodlouse on the one side, and Messrs.
Mudflint and Bloodsuck on the other; and in due time they all applied,
as a matter of course, for relief under the Insolvent Debtors' Act.
Before they got to the question concerning the nature of the debt--viz.
the penalties in an action for the odious offence of bribery--in the
case of Mr. Mudflint, he had to encounter a very serious and truly
unexpected obstacle--viz. he had given in, with the minutest accuracy,
the items of the subscription, amounting to £3, 13s. 5-3/4d., but had
observed the most mysterious and (as he might have supposed) politic
silence concerning _the greater sum_ of £650, and which had been brought
under the notice of the creditors of Messrs. Mudflint and Bloodsuck by
Mr. Woodlouse. On the newspaper acknowledging the receipt of that large
sum being produced in court, Mr. Mudflint made very light of the matter,
simply smiling and shrugging his shoulders; but when Mr. Woodlouse was
called as a witness, you may guess the consternation of Mr. Mudflint, on
hearing him swear that he had certainly never himself received the
money, but had no doubt of Mr. Mudflint having done so--which, in fact,
had always been his impression; for when Mr. Mudflint had furnished him
with the list, which he handed up to court, in Mudflint's handwriting,
he inserted it in his paper as a matter of course--taking it to be a
_bonâ fide_ and matter-of-fact transaction. The evident consternation of
Mudflint satisfied all who heard him of his villany, and of the truth
and honesty of Woodlouse, who stuck to this new version of the affair
manfully. But this opened quite a new view of his position to Mr.
Bloodsuck; who, on finding that he must needs adopt either Mudflint's or
Woodlouse's account of the matter, began to reflect upon the
disagreeable effect it would have, thereafter, upon the connection and
character of the respectable firm of Bloodsuck and Son, for him to
appear to have been a party to such a shocking fraud upon the public, as
a sham list of subscribers, and to so large an amount. He therefore
swore stoutly that he, too, had always been under the impression that
Mr. Mudflint had received the £650!! and very much regretted to find
that that gentleman must have been appropriating so large a sum to
himself, instead of being now ready to divide it between their
respective creditors. This tallied with Woodlouse's account of the
matter; and infinitely disgusted was that gentleman at finding himself
so cleverly outwitted by Bloodsuck. On this Mudflint turned with fury
upon Bloodsuck, and he upon Mudflint, who abused Woodlouse; and
eventually the commissioners, unable to believe any of them, remanded
them all, as a pack of rogues, till the next court day; addressing a
very stern warning to Mr. Mudflint, concerning the serious consequences
of his persisting in fraudulently concealing his property from his
creditors. By the time of his being next brought up, the persecuted
Mudflint had bethought himself of a bold mode of corroborating the
truth of his explanation of that accursed first list of
subscribers--viz. summoning Sir Harkaway Rotgut Wildfire as a witness in
his behalf; whom he confidently asked whether, for all his name appeared
in the subscription list, he had really ever given one farthing of the
£50 there mentioned? Now, had our friend Mudflint been a long-headed
man, he would not have taken this step; for Sir Harkaway could never be
supposed capable of bringing himself to admit that he had been a party
to such a dirty deceit upon the public as he was now charged with. On a
careful consideration of the circumstances, therefore, Sir Harkaway,
having an eye solely to his own credit, first said, with a somewhat
haughty, but at the same time embarrassed air, that he was not in the
habit of allowing his name to appear in such lists without his having
actually paid the sum named, then, on being pressed, he swore that he
_thought_ he must have paid it; then, that he had very _little_ doubt on
the subject; then, that he had _no_ doubt on the matter at all; then,
that he knew that in point of fact he _had_ advanced the money; and
finally, that he then recollected all the circumstances most
distinctly!--On this complete confirmation of the roguery of Mudflint,
he was instantly reprimanded severely, and remanded indefinitely; the
whole court believing that he had appropriated to his own use every
farthing of the £650, defrauding even his fellow-prisoner, Mr.
Bloodsuck. It was a good while before Mudflint recovered from the
effects of this astounding conduct of Sir Harkaway. When his wits had
returned to him, he felt certain that, somewhere or other, he had a
letter from Sir Harkaway which would satisfy everybody of the very
peculiarly unpleasant position in which the worthy baronet had placed
himself. And sure enough, on desiring his wife to institute a rigorous
search among his papers, she succeeded in discovering the following
remarkable document, which she at once forwarded to her disconsolate
husband:--

                                    "_View-Hallo Hall, 27th Dec. 18--._

     "SIR,
     "I have a considerable regard for your services to liberty, (civil
     and religious,) and am willing to serve you in the way you wish.
     You may _put me down_, therefore, in the list for anything you
     please, as my name carries weight in the county--but, of course,
     you know better than to _kill your decoy duck_."
                             "Sir, your obedient servant,
                                                       "H. R. WILDFIRE.

     "The REV. S. MUDFLINT, &c., &c."

This unfortunate letter, in the first frenzy of his rage and exultation,
Mudflint instantly forwarded, with a statement of facts, to the editor
of the _True Blue_ newspaper, which carried it into every corner of the
county on the very next morning; and undoubtedly gave thereby a heavy
blow and a great discouragement to the Liberal cause all over Yorkshire;
for Sir Harkaway had always been looked upon as one of its very
stanchest and most powerful supporters.




CHAPTER XII.


Very shortly after Messrs. Mudflint and Bloodsuck had gone to pay this,
their long-expected visit, to the governor of York Castle, Mr. Parkinson
required possession of the residence of each of them, in Yatton, to be
delivered up to him on behalf of Lord Drelincourt, allowing a week's
time for the removal of the few effects of each; after which period had
elapsed, the premises in question were completely cleared of everything
belonging to their late odious occupants--who, in all human probability,
would, infinitely to the delight of Dr. Tatham and all the better sort
of the inhabitants, never again be there seen or heard of. In a similar
manner another crying nuisance--viz. the public-house known by the name
of The Toper's Arms--was got rid of; it having been resolved upon by
Lord Drelincourt, that there should be thenceforth but one in Yatton,
viz.,--the quiet, old, original Aubrey Arms, and which was quite
sufficient for the purposes of the inhabitants. Two or three other
persons who had crept into the village during the Titmouse dynasty were
similarly dealt with, infinitely to the satisfaction of those left
behind; and by Christmas-day the village was beginning to show signs of
a return to its former condition. The works going on at the Hall gave an
air of cheerful bustle and animation to the whole neighborhood, and
afforded extensive employment at a season of the year when it was most
wanted. The chapel and residence of the Rev. Mr. Mudflint underwent a
rapid and remarkable alteration. The fact was, that Mr. Delamere had
conceived the idea, which, with Lord Drelincourt's consent, he
proceeded to carry immediately into execution, of pulling down the
existing structure, and raising in its stead a very beautiful school,
and filling it with scholars, and providing a matron for it, by way of
giving a pleasant surprise to Kate on her return to Yatton. He engaged a
well-known architect, who submitted to him a plan of a very beautiful
little Gothic structure, adapted for receiving some eighteen or twenty
scholars, and also affording a permanent residence for the mistress. The
scheme being heartily approved of by Mr. Delamere and Dr. Tatham, whom
he had taken into his counsels in the affair, they received a pledge
that the school should be completed and fit for occupation within three
months' time. There was to be, in the front, a small and tasteful
tablet, bearing the inscription--

                             _=C. A.=_
                          _=Fundatrix.=_
                               18--.

The mistress of Kate's former school gladly relinquished a similar
situation which she held in another part of the county, in order to
return to her old one at Yatton; and Dr. Tatham was, in the first
instance, to select the scholars, who were to be clothed at Delamere's
expense, in the former neat and simple attire which had been adopted by
Miss Aubrey. How he delighted to think of the charming surprise which he
was thus preparing for his lovely mistress, and by which, at the same
time, he was securing for her a permanent and interesting memento in the
neighborhood!

About this time there came a general election; the nation being
thoroughly disgusted with the character and conduct of a great number of
those who had, in the direful hubbub of the last election, contrived to
creep into the House of Commons. Public affairs were, moreover, getting
daily into a more deranged and dangerous condition: in fact, the
Ministers might have been compared to a parcel of little mischievous and
venturesome boys, who had found their way into the vast and complicated
machinery of some steam-engine, and set it into a fearful motion, which
they could neither understand nor govern; and from which they were only
too glad to escape safely--if possible--and make way for those whose
proper business it was to attend to it. All I have to do, however, at
present, with that most important political movement, is to state its
effect upon the representation of the borough of Yatton. Its late
member, Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse, it completely annihilated. Of course, he
made no attempt to stand again; nor, in fact, did any one in the same
interest. The _Yorkshire Stingo_, in its very last number, (of which
twelve only were sold,) tried desperately to get up a contest, but in
vain. Mr. Going Gone--and even Mr. Glister--were quite willing to have
stood--but, in the first place, neither of them could afford to pay his
share of the expenses of erecting the hustings; and, secondly, there
were insurmountable difficulties in the way of either of them procuring
even a pseudo qualification.[21] Besides, the more sensible of even the
strong Liberal electors had become alive to the exquisite absurdity of
returning such persons as Titmouse, or any one of his class. Then the
Quaint Club had ceased to exist, partly through the change of political
feeling which was rapidly gaining ground in the borough, and partly
through terror of the consequences of bribery, of which the miserable
fate of Mudflint and Bloodsuck was a fearful instance. In fact, the
disasters which had befallen those gentlemen, and Mr. Titmouse, had
completely paralyzed and crushed the Liberal party at Yatton, and
disabled it from ever attempting to contend against the paramount and
legitimate influence of Lord Drelincourt. The result of all this was,
the return, without a contest, of the Honorable Geoffrey Lovel Delamere
as the representative of the borough of Yatton in the new Parliament; an
event, which he penned his first frank[22] in communicating to a certain
young lady then in London. Nothing, doubtless, could be more delightful
for Mr. Delamere; but in what a direful predicament did the loss of his
seat place the late member, Mr. Titmouse! Just consider for a moment.
Mr. Flummery's promise to him of a "place," had vanished, of course,
into thin air--having answered its purpose of securing Mr. Titmouse's
vote up to the very moment of the dissolution; an event which Mr.
Flummery feared would tend to deprive himself of the honor of serving
his country in any official capacity for some twenty years to come--if
he should so long live, and the country so long survive his exclusion
from office. Foiled thus miserably in this quarter, Mr. Titmouse applied
himself with redoubled energy to render available his other resources,
and made repeated and most impassioned applications to Mr. O'Gibbet--who
never took, however, the slightest notice of any of them: considering
very justly that Mr. Titmouse was no more entitled to receive back, than
he had originally been to lend, the £500 in question. As for Mr.
O'Doodle and Mr. M'Squash they, like himself, were thrown out of
Parliament; and no one upon earth seemed able to tell whither they had
gone, or what had become of them, though there were a good many people
who made it their business to inquire into the matter very anxiously.
That quarter, therefore, seemed at present quite hopeless. Then there
was an Honorable youngster, who owed him a hundred pounds; but he, the
moment that he had lost his election, caused it to be given out to any
one interested in his welfare--and there suddenly appeared to be a great
many such--that he was gone on a scientific expedition to the South
Pole, from which he trusted, though he was not very sanguine, that he
should, one day, come back.--All these things drove Mr. Titmouse very
nearly beside himself--and certainly his position was a little
precarious. When Parliament was dissolved, he had in his pocket a couple
of sovereigns, the residue of a five-pound note, out of which, _mirabile
dictu_, he had actually succeeded in teasing Mr. Flummery on the evening
of the last division; and these two sovereigns, a shirt or two, the
articles actually on his person, and a copy of _Boxiana_, were all his
assets to meet liabilities of about a hundred thousand pounds; and the
panoply of Parliamentary "privilege" was dropping off, as it were,
hourly. In a very few days' time, in fact, he would be at the mercy of a
terrific host of creditors, who were waiting to spring upon his little
carcass like so many famished wolves. Every one of them had gone on with
his action up to _judgment_ for both debt and costs--and had his _Ca.
Sa._ and _Fi. Fa._[23] ready for use at an instant's notice. There were
three of these injured gentlemen--the three Jews, Israel Fang, Mordecai
Gripe, and Mephibosheth Mahar-shalal-hash-baz--who had entered into a
solemn vow with one another that they would never lose sight of Titmouse
for one moment, by day or by night, whatever pains or expense it might
cost them--until, the period of privilege having expired, they should be
at liberty to plunge their talons into the body of their little debtor.
There were, in fact, at least a hundred of his creditors ready to pounce
upon him the instant that he should make the slightest attempt to quit
the country. His lodgings consisted, at this time, of a miserable little
room in a garret at the back of a small house in Westminster, not far
from the Houses of Parliament, and of the two, inferior to the room in
Closet Court, Oxford Street, in which he was first presented to the
reader. Here he would often lie in bed half the day, drinking
weak--because he could not afford strong--brandy and water, and
endeavoring to consider "what the devil" he had done with the immense
sums of money which had been at his disposal--how he would act, if by
some lucky chance he should again become wealthy--and, in short, "what
the plague was now to become of him." What was he to do? Whither should
he go?--To sea?--Then it must be as a common sailor--if any one would
now take him! Or suppose he were to enlist? "Glorious war, and all
that," _et cetera_; but both these schemes pre-supposed his being able
to escape from his creditors, who, he had a vehement suspicion, were on
the look-out for him in all directions. Every review that he thus took
of his hopeless position and prospects, ended in a fiendish degree of
abhorrence of his parents, whose fault alone it was--in having brought
him into the world--that he had been thus turned out of a splendid
estate of ten thousand a-year, and made worse than a beggar. He would
sometimes spring out of bed, convulsively clutching his hands together,
and wishing himself beside their grave, to tear them out of it. He
thought of Mr. Quirk, Mr. Snap, and Mr. Tag-rag, with fury; but whenever
he adverted to Mr. Gammon, he shuddered all over, as if in the presence
of a baleful spectre. For all this, he preserved the same impudent strut
and swagger in the street which had ever distinguished him. Every day of
his life he walked towards the scenes of his recent splendor, which
seemed to attract him irresistibly. He would pass the late Earl of
Dreddlington's house, in Grosvenor Square, staring at it, and at the
hatchment suspended in front of it. Then he would wander on to Park
Lane, and gaze with unutterable feelings--poor little wretch!--at the
house which once had been his and Lady Cecilia's, but was then occupied
by a nobleman, whose tasteful equipage and servants were often standing
at and before the door. He would, on some of those occasions, feel as
though he should like to drop down dead, and be out of all his misery.
If ever he met and nodded, or spoke to those with whom he had till
recently been on the most familiar terms, he was encountered by a steady
stare, and sometimes a smile, which withered his very heart within him,
and made the last three years of his life appear to have been but a
dream. The little dinner that he ate--for he had almost entirely lost
his appetite through long addiction to drinking--was at a small tavern,
at only a few doors' distance from his lodgings, and where he generally
spent his evenings, for want of any other place to go to; and he formed
at length a sort of intimacy with a good-natured and very respectable
gentleman, who came nearly as often thither as Titmouse himself, and
would sit conversing with him very pleasantly over his cigar and a glass
of spirits and water. The oftener Titmouse saw him, the more he liked
him; and at length, taking him entirely into his confidence, unbosomed
himself concerning his unhappy present circumstances, and still more
unhappy prospects. This man was a brother of Mahar-shalal-hash-baz the
Jew, and a sheriff's officer, keeping watch upon his movements, night
and day, alternately with another who had not attracted Titmouse's
notice. After having canvassed several modes of disposing of himself,
none of which were satisfactory to either Titmouse or his friend, he
hinted that he was aware that there were lots of the enemy on the
look-out for him, and who would be glad to get at him; but he knew, he
said, that he was as safe as in a castle for some time yet to come; and
he also mentioned a scheme which had occurred to him--but this was all
in the strictest confidence--viz. to write to Lord Drelincourt, (who
was, after all, his relation of some sort or other, and ought to be
devilish glad to get into all his, Titmouse's, property so easily,) and
ask him for some situation under government, either in France, India, or
America, and give him a trifle to set him up at starting, and help him
to "nick the bums!" His friend listened attentively, and then protested
that he thought it an excellent idea, and Mr. Titmouse had better write
the letter and take it at once. Upon this Titmouse sent for pen, ink,
and paper; and while his friend leaned back calmly smoking his cigar,
and sipping his gin and water, poor Titmouse wrote the following epistle
to Lord Drelincourt--the very last which I shall be able to lay before
the reader:--

     "To the Right HON. LORD DRELINCOURT, My Lord--

     "Natrally situated In The Way which I Am With y^r lordship Most
     Unpleasantly Addressing you On A Matter of that Nature most Painful
     To My feelings Considering My surprising Forlorn Condition, And So
     Sudden Which Who c^d Have A Little While Ago suppos'd. Y^r Lordship
     (of Course) Is Aware That There Is No fault of Mine, But rather My
     Cursed Parents w^h Ought To be Ashamed of Themselves For Their
     Improper Conduct w^h Was never made Acquainted with till Lately
     with Great Greif. Alas. I Only Wish I Had Never Been Born, or Was
     Dead and Cumfortable in An Erly Grave. I Humbly, My Lord,
     Endevoured To Do My Duty when In the Upper Circles and Especially
     to the People, which I Always voted for, _Steady_, in The House,
     And Never Injured Any One, Much less you, My Lord, if You Will
     Believe Me, For I surely w^d. Not Have Come Upon You In the Way I
     did My Lord But Was obliged, And Regret, &c. I Am Most Truly
     Miserable, Being (Betwixt You and Me, my Lord) over Head and Years
     in debt, And Have Nothing To pay With and out of _The House_ So
     Have No Protection and Fear am Going Very Fast To y^e. Dogs, my
     Lord, Swindle O'Gibbet, Esq. M.P. Owes me £500 (borrowed Money) and
     Will not Pay and is a Shocking Scamp, but (depend upon it) I will
     stick To Him Like a Leach. Of Course Now your Lordship Is Got into
     y^e Estate &c. you Will Have y^e Rents, &c., but Is Not _Half_ The
     _Last Quarter_ Mine Seeing I Was in possession w^h is 9-10ths of
     y^e law. But gave it All up To you willingly Now For what can't Be
     cur'd, Must Be Indur'd can y^r lordship Get me _Some Foreign_
     Appointment _Abroad_ w^h sh^d be much obliged for and Would Get Me
     out of the Way of Troubling y^r lordship about the Rents w^h
     _freely give Up_. You Being Got To _that High Rank_ w^h was to
     Have Been mine can do What You please doubtless. Am Sorry To Say I
     am Most Uncommon Hard Up Since I Have Broke up. And am nearly Run
     Out. Consider my Lord How Easy I Let You Win y^e Property. When
     might Have Given Your Lordship Trouble. If you will Remember this
     And Be So obliging to _Lend me_ a £10 Note (For y^e Present) Will
     much oblige
                                 "Your Lordship's to Command,
                                         "Most obed^t
                                                    "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

     "P.S.--I Leave This with my _Own Hand_ That you May be Sure and get
     it. Remember me to Miss A. and Lady D."

Mr. Titmouse contented himself with telling his new friend merely the
substance of the above epistle, and, having sealed it up, he asked his
companion if he were disposed for a walk to the West End; and on being
answered in the affirmative, they both set off for Lord Drelincourt's
house in Dover Street. When they had reached it, his friend stepped to a
little distance; while Titmouse, endeavoring to assume a confident air,
hemmed, twitched up his shirt-collar, and knocked and rang with all the
boldness of a gentleman coming to dinner. Open flew the door in a
moment; and--

"My Lord Drelincourt's--isn't it?" inquired Titmouse, holding his letter
in his hand, and tapping his ebony cane pretty loudly against his legs.

"Of course it is! What d'ye want?" quoth the porter, sternly, enraged at
being disturbed at such an hour by such a puppy of a fellow as then
stood before him--for the bloom was off the finery of Titmouse; and who
that knew the world would call, and with such a knock, at seven o'clock
with a letter? Titmouse would have answered the fellow pretty sharply,
but was afraid of endangering the success of his application: so, with
considerable calmness, he replied--

"Oh--Then have the goodness to deliver this into his Lordship's own
hand--it's of great importance."

"Very well," said the porter, stiffly, not dreaming what a remarkable
personage was the individual whom he was addressing, and the next
instant shut the door in his face.

"Dem impudent blackguard!" said he, as he rejoined his friend--his heart
almost bursting with mortification and fury; "I've a great mind to call
to-morrow, 'pon my soul--and get him discharged!"

He had dated his letter from his lodgings, where, about ten o'clock on
the ensuing morning, a gentleman--in fact, Lord Drelincourt's man of
business--called, and asking to see Mr. Titmouse, gave into his hands a
letter, of which the following is a copy:--

                                     "_Dover Street, Wednesday Morning._

     "Lord Drelincourt, in answer to Mr. Titmouse's letter, requests his
     acceptance of the enclosed Bank of England Note for Ten Pounds.

     "Lord D. wishes Mr. Titmouse to furnish him with an address, to
     which any further communications on the part of Lord D. may be
     addressed."

On repairing to the adjoining tavern, soon after receiving the above
most welcome note, Mr. Titmouse fortunately (!) fell in with his friend,
and, with somewhat of an air of easy triumph, showed him Lord
Drelincourt's note, and its enclosure. Some time afterwards, having
smoked each a couple of cigars and drank a couple of tumblers of brandy
and water, Mr. Titmouse's companion got very confidential, and in a low
whisper said, that he had been thinking over Mr. Titmouse's case ever
since they were talking together the night before; and for five pounds
would put him in the way of escaping all danger immediately, provided no
questions were asked by Mr. Titmouse; for he, the speaker, was running a
great risk in what he was doing. Titmouse placed his hand over his
heart, exclaiming, "Honor--honor!" and having called for change from the
landlord, gave a five-pound note into the hand of his companion, who
thereupon, in a mysterious undertone, told him that by ten o'clock the
next morning he would have a hackney-coach at the door of his lodgings,
and would at once convey him safely to a vessel then in the river, and
bound for the south of France; where Mr. Titmouse might remain till he
had in some measure settled his affairs with his creditors. Sure enough,
at the appointed time, the promised vehicle drew up at the door of the
house where Titmouse lodged; and within a few moments' time he came
down-stairs with a small portmanteau, and entered the coach where sat
his friend, evidently not wishing to be recognized or seen by anybody
passing. They talked together earnestly and eagerly as they journeyed
eastward; and just as they arrived opposite a huge dismal-looking
building, with a large door, and immensely high walls, the coach
stopped. Three or four persons were standing, as if they had been in
expectation of an arrival; and, requesting Mr. Titmouse to alight for a
moment, his friend opened the coach door from within, and let down the
steps. The moment that poor Titmouse had got out, he was instantly
surrounded, and seized by the collar by those who were standing by; his
perfidious "friend" had disappeared; and almost petrified with amazement
and fright, and taken quite off his guard by the suddenness of the
movement, poor Titmouse was hurried through the doorway of the King's
Bench Prison, the three Jews following close at his heels, and conducted
into a very gloomy room. There he seemed first to awake to the horrors
of his situation, and went into a paroxysm of despair and fury. He
sprang madly towards the door, and on being repulsed by those standing
beside him, stamped violently about the room, shouting, "Murder, murder!
thieves!" Then he pulled his hair, shook his head with frantic
vehemence, and presently sank into a seat, from which, after a few
moments, he sprang wildly, and broke his cane into a number of pieces,
scattering them about the room like a madman. Then he cried
passionately; more, in fact, like a frantic school-girl, than a man; and
struck his head violently with his fists. All this while the three Jews
were looking on with a grin of devilish gratification at the little
wretch's agony. His frenzy lasted so long that he was removed to a
strong room, and threatened with being put into a strait waistcoat if he
continued to conduct himself so outrageously. The fact of his being thus
safely housed, soon became known, and within a day or two's time, the
miserable little fellow was completely overwhelmed by his creditors;
who, absurd and unavailing as were their proceedings, came rushing down
upon him, one after another, with as breathless an impetuosity as if
they had thought him a mass of solid gold, which was to become the spoil
of him who could first seize it. The next day his fate was announced to
the world by paragraphs in all the morning newspapers, which informed
their readers that "yesterday Mr. Titmouse, late M.P. for Yatton, was
secured by a skilful stratagem, just as he was on the point of quitting
this country for America, and lodged in the King's Bench Prison, at the
suit of three creditors, to the extent of upwards of sixty thousand
pounds. It is understood that his debts considerably exceed the sum of
one hundred and fifty thousand pounds." As soon as he had become calm
enough to do so--viz. three or four days after his incarceration--he
wrote a long, dismal epistle to Lord Drelincourt, and also one to Miss
Aubrey, passionately reminding them both that he was, after all, of the
same blood with themselves, only luck had gone for them and against him,
and therefore he hoped they would "remember him, and do something to get
him out of his trouble." He seemed to cling to them as though he had a
claim upon them--instead of being himself Lord Drelincourt's debtor to
the amount of, _at least_, twenty thousand pounds, had his Lordship,
instead of inclining a compassionate ear to his entreaties, chosen to
fling his heavy claim, too, into the scale against him. This, however,
was a view of the case which never occurred to poor Titmouse. Partly of
their own accord, and partly at Miss Aubrey's earnest entreaty, Lord
Drelincourt and Mr. Delamere went to the King's Bench Prison, and had a
long interview with him--his Lordship being specially anxious to
ascertain, if possible, whether Titmouse had been originally privy to
the monstrous fraud by means of which he had succeeded in possessing
himself of Yatton, at so fearful a cost of suffering to those whom he
had deprived of it. While he was chattering away, more after the fashion
of a newly-caged ape, than a MAN, with eager and impassioned tone and
gesticulation--with a profuse usage of his favorite phraseology--"'Pon
my soul!" "'Pon my life!" "By Jove!" and of several shocking oaths, for
which he was repeatedly and sternly rebuked by Lord Drelincourt, with
what profound and melancholy interest did the latter regard the strange
being before him, and think of the innumerable extraordinary things
which he had heard concerning him! Here was the widowed husband of the
Lady Cecilia, and son-in-law of the Earl of Dreddlington--that broken
pillar of pride!--broken, alas! in the very moment of imaginary
magnificence! Here was the late member of Parliament for the borough of
Yatton, whose constituency had deliberately declared him possessed of
their complete confidence!--on whose individual vote had several times
depended the existence of the king's ministry, and the passing of
measures of the greatest possible magnitude! This was he whom all
society--even the most brilliant--had courted as a great lion.--This was
the sometime owner of Yatton! who had aspired to the hand of Miss
Aubrey! who had for two years revelled in every conceivable species of
luxury, splendor, and profligacy! Here was the individual at whose
instance--at whose nod--Lord Drelincourt had been deprived of his
liberty, ruthlessly torn from the bleeding bosom of his family, and he
and they, for many, many weary months, subjected to the most harassing
and heart-breaking privations and distresses! On quitting him, Lord
Drelincourt put into his hand a ten-pound note, with which Titmouse
seemed--though he dared not say so--not a little disappointed. His
Lordship and Mr. Delamere were inclined, upon the whole--for Titmouse
had displayed some little cunning--to believe that he had not been aware
of his illegitimacy till the issue of the ecclesiastical proceedings had
been published; but from many remarks he let fall, they were satisfied
that Mr. Gammon must have known the fact from a very early period--for
Titmouse spoke freely of the constant mysterious threats he was in the
habit of receiving from Mr. Gammon. Lord Drelincourt had promised
Titmouse to consider in what way he could serve him; and during the
course of the day instructed Mr. Runnington to put the case into the
hands of some attorney of the Insolvent Debtors' Court, with a view of
endeavoring to obtain for the unfortunate little wretch the "_benefit
of the Act_." As soon as the course of practice would admit of it, he
was brought up in the ordinary way before the court, which was quite
crowded by persons either interested as creditors, or curious to see so
celebrated a person as TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE. The commissioners were
astounded at the sight of the number and magnitude of his liabilities--a
hundred thousand pounds at least!--against which he had nothing to set
except the following items:--

     Cash lent Swindle O'Gibbet, Esq. M. P        £500
     Do. do. Phelim O'Doodle                       200
     Do. do. Micah M'Squash                        100

--together with some other similar but lesser sums; but for none of them
could he produce any vouchers, except for the sum lent to the Hon. Empty
Belly, who had been imprudent enough to give him his I. O. U. Poor
Titmouse's discharge was most vehemently opposed on the part of his
creditors--particularly the three Jews--whose frantic and indecorous
conduct in open court occasioned the chief commissioner to order them to
be twice removed. _They_ would have had Titmouse remanded to the day of
his death! After several adjourned and lengthened hearings, the court
pronounced him not to be entitled to his discharge till he should have
remained in prison for the space of eighteen calendar months; on hearing
which he burst into a fit of loud and bitter weeping, and was removed
from court, wringing his hands and shaking his head in perfect despair.
As soon as this result had been communicated to Lord Drelincourt, (who
had taken special care that his name should not be among those of Mr.
Titmouse's creditors,) he came to the humane determination of allowing
him a hundred and fifty pounds a-year for his life, _payable weekly_, to
commence from the date of his being remanded to prison.--For the first
month or so he spent all his weekly allowance in brandy and water and
cigars, within three days after receiving it. Then he took to gambling
with his fellow-prisoners; but, all of a sudden, he turned over quite a
new leaf. The fact was, that he had become intimate with an unfortunate
literary hack, who used to procure small sums by writing articles for
inferior newspapers and magazines; and at his suggestion, Titmouse fell
to work upon several quires of foolscap: the following being the title
given to his projected work by his new friend--

                         "UPS and DOWNS:
                              Being
                       Memoirs of My Life,
                               by
                    TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, Esq.,
                     Late M. P. for Yatton."

He got so far on with his task as to fill three quires of paper; and it
is a fact that a fashionable publisher got scent of the undertaking,
came to the prison, and offered him three hundred pounds for his
manuscript, provided only he would undertake that it should fill three
volumes. This greatly stimulated Titmouse; but unfortunately he fell ill
before he had completed the first volume, and never, during the
remainder of his confinement, recovered himself sufficiently to proceed
further with his labors. I once had an opportunity of glancing over what
he had written, which was really very curious, but I do not know what
has since become of it. During the last month of his imprisonment he
became intimate with a villanous young Jew attorney, who, under the
pretence of commencing proceedings in the House of Lords (!) for the
recovering of the Yatton property once more from Lord Drelincourt,
contrived to get into his own pockets more than one-half of the weekly
sum allowed by that nobleman to his grateful pensioner! On the very day
of his discharge, Titmouse--not comprehending the nature of his own
position--went off straight to the lodgings of Mr. Swindle O'Gibbet to
demand payment of the five hundred pounds due to him from that honorable
gentleman, to whom he became a source of inconceivable vexation and
torment. Following him about with a sort of insane and miserable
pertinacity, Titmouse lay in wait for him now at his lodgings--then at
the door of the House of Commons; dogged him from the one point to the
other; assailed him with passionate entreaties and reproaches in the
open street: went to the public meetings over which Mr. O'Gibbet
presided, or where he spoke, (always on behalf of the rights of
conscience and the liberty of the subject,) and would call out--"Pay me
my five hundred pounds! I want my money! Where's my five hundred
pounds?" on which Mr. O'Gibbet would point to him, call him an
"impostor! a liar!" furiously adding that he was only hired by the
enemies of the people to come and disturb their proceedings: whereupon
(which was surely a new way of paying old debts) Titmouse was always
shuffled about--his hat knocked over his eyes--and he was finally kicked
out, and once or twice pushed down from the top to the bottom of the
stairs. The last time that this happened, poor Titmouse's head struck
with dreadful force against the banisters; and he lay for some time
stunned and bleeding. On being carried to a doctor's shop, he was
shortly afterwards seized with a fit of epilepsy. This seemed to have
given the finishing stroke to his shattered intellects; for he sank soon
afterwards into a state of idiocy. Through the kindness and at the
expense of Lord Drelincourt, he was admitted an inmate of a private
lunatic asylum, in the Curtain Road, near Hoxton, where he still
continues. He is very harmless; and after dressing himself in the
morning with extraordinary pains--never failing to have a glimpse
visible of his white pocket-handkerchief out of the pocket in the breast
of his surtout--nor to have his boots very brightly polished--he
generally sits down with a glass of strong and warm toast and water, and
a colored straw, which he imagines to be brandy and water, and a cigar.
He complained, at first, that the brandy and water was very weak; but he
is now reconciled to it, and sips his two tumblers daily with an air of
tranquil enjoyment. When I last saw him he was thus occupied. On my
approaching him, he hastily stuck his quizzing-glass into his eye, where
it was retained by the force of muscular contraction, while he stared at
me with all his former expression of rudeness and presumption. 'Twas at
once a ridiculous and a mournful sight.

I should have been very glad, if, consistently with my duty as an
impartial historian, I could have concealed some discreditable features
in the conduct of Mr. Tag-rag, subsequently to his unfortunate
bankruptcy. I shall not, however, dwell upon them at greater length than
is necessary. His creditors were so much dissatisfied with his conduct,
that not one of them could be prevailed upon to sign his
certificate,[24] by which means he was prevented from re-establishing
himself in business, even had he been able to find the means of so
doing; since, in the eye of our law, any business carried on by an
uncertificated bankrupt, is so carried on by him only as a trustee for
his creditors.--His temper getting more and more soured, he became at
length quite intolerable to his wife, whom he had married only for her
fortune, (£800, and the good-will of her late husband's business, as a
retail draper and hosier, in Little Turn-stile, Holborn.) When he found
that Mrs. Tag-rag would not forsake her unhappy daughter, he snapped his
fingers at her, and, I regret to say, told her that she and her
daughter, and her respectable husband, might all go to the devil
together--but he must shift for himself; and, in plain English, he took
himself off. Mr. Dismal Horror found that he had made a sad business of
it, in marrying Miss Tag-rag, who brought him two children in the first
nineteen months, and seemed likely to go on at that rate for a long time
to come, which made Mr. Horror think very seriously of following the
example of his excellent father-in-law--viz. deserting his wife. They
had contrived to scrape together a bit of a day-school for young
children, in Goswell Street; but which was inadequate to the support of
themselves, and also of Mrs. Tag-rag, who had failed in obtaining the
situation of pew-opener to a neighboring dissenting chapel. The scheme
he had conceived, he soon afterwards carried into effect; for, whereas
he went out one day saying he should return in an hour's time, he
nevertheless came not back at all. Burning with zeal to display his
pulpit talents, he took to street-preaching, and at length succeeded in
getting around him a group of hearers, many of them most serious and
attentive pickpockets, with dexterous fingers and devout faces, wherever
he held forth, which was principally in the neighborhood of the Tower
and Smithfield--till he was driven away by the police, who never
interfered with his little farce till he had sent his hat round; when,
to preserve the peace, they would rush in, disperse the crowd, and
taking him into custody, convey him to the police-office, where, in
spite of his eloquent defences, he several times got sentenced to three
months' imprisonment, as an incorrigible disturber of the peace, and in
league with the questionable characters, who--the police declared--were
invariably members of every congregation he addressed. One occasion of
his being thus taken into custody was rather a singular one:--Mr.
Tag-rag happened to be passing while he was holding forth, and, unable
to control his fury, made his way immediately in front of the
impassioned preacher; and, sticking his fists in his side a-kimbo,
exclaimed, "_Aren't_ you a nice young man now?"--which quite
disconcerted his pious son-in-law, who threw his hymn-book in his
father-in-law's face, which bred such a disturbance that the police
rushed in, and took them both off to the police-office; where such a
scene ensued as beggars all description. What has since become of Mr.
Horror, I do not know; but the next thing I heard of Mr. Tag-rag was his
entering into the employ of no other a person than Mr. Huckaback, who
had been for some time settled in a little shop in the neighborhood of
Leicester Square. Having, however, inadvertently shown in to Mr.
Huckaback one of the creditors to whom he had given special orders to be
denied, that gentleman instantly turned him out of the shop, in a fury,
without character or wages; which latter, nevertheless, Tag-rag soon
compelled him, by the process of the Court of Bequests, to pay him;
being one week's entire salary. In passing one day a mock auction, on
the left-hand side of the Poultry, I could not help pausing to admire
the cool effrontery with which the Jew in the box was putting up showy
but worthless articles to sale to four patient puffers--his entire
audience--and who bid against one another in a very business-like way
for everything which was thus proposed for their consideration. Guess my
astonishment and concern, when one of the aforesaid puffers, who stood
with his back towards me, happened to look round for a moment, to
discover in him my friend Mr. Tag-rag!! His hat was nicely brushed, but
all the "_nap_" was off; his coat was clean, threadbare, and evidently
had been made for some other person; under his arm was an old cotton
umbrella; and in his hands, which were clasped behind him, were a pair
of antiquated black gloves, doubled up, only for show, evidently not
for use. Notwithstanding, however, he had sunk thus low, there happened
to him, some time afterwards, one or two surprising strokes of good
fortune. First of all, he contrived to get a sum of three hundred pounds
from one of his former debtors, who imagined that Tag-rag was authorized
by his assignees to receive it. Nothing, however, of the kind; and
Tag-rag quietly opened a small shop in the neighborhood of St. George's
in the East, and began to scrape together a tolerable business. Reading
one day a flourishing speech in Parliament, on the atrocious enormity of
calling upon Dissenters to pay Church-rates--it occurred to Mr. Tag-rag
as likely to turn out a good speculation, and greatly increase his
business, if he were to become a martyr for conscience sake; and after
turning the thing about a good deal in his mind, he determined on
refusing to pay the sum of twopence-halfpenny, due in respect of a rate
which had been recently made for the repair of the church steeple, then
very nearly falling down. In a very civil and unctuous manner, he
announced to the collector his determination to refuse the payment on
strictly conscientious grounds. The collector expostulated--but in vain.
Then came the amazed churchwardens--Tag-rag, however, was inflexible.
The thing began to get wind, and the rector, an amiable and learned
man--and an earnest lover of peace in his parish--came to try his powers
of persuasion--but he might have saved himself the trouble; 'twas
impossible to divert Mr. Tag-rag's eye from the glorious crown of
martyrdom he had resolved upon earning. Then he called on the minister
of the congregation where he "worshipped," and with tears and agitation
unbosomed himself upon the subject, and besought his counsel. The
intelligent and pious pastor got excited; so did his leading people. A
meeting was called at his chapel, the result of which was a declaration
that Mr. Tag-rag's conduct was most praiseworthy and noble--that he had
taken his stand upon a great principle--and deserved to be supported.
Several leading members of the congregation, who had never dealt with
him before, suddenly became customers of his. The upshot of the matter
was, that after a prodigious stir, Mr. Tag-rag became a victim in right
earnest; and was taken into custody by virtue of a writ _De Contumace
Capiendo_, amid the indignant sympathy and admiration of all those
enlightened persons who shared his opinions. In a twinkling he shot up,
as it were, into the air like a rocket, and became popular, beyond his
most sanguine expectations. The name of the first Church-rate martyr
went the round of every paper in the United Kingdom; and at length came
out a lithographed likeness of his odious face, with his precious
autograph appended, so--

                "THOMAS TAG-RAG, CHURCH-RATE MARTYR."

Subscriptions were entered into on his behalf; and as they were paid
into his hands from time to time, he kept quietly increasing his
purchases of linen-drapery and enlarging his business, in a most
decisive and satisfactory manner. Nothing could exceed the accounts
brought in to the poor martyr of the extent to which his custom was
increasing; for in each window of his shop hung a copy of his portrait,
attracting the eye of every passenger. But he was not the only person
who rejoiced in this state of things; there being others who had a deep
stake in his success, and whom--forgetful of the maxim that one should
begin nothing till one has well considered the end of it--he had not at
first adverted to, viz. HIS ASSIGNEES--to whom belonged, in point of
law, the rattling business he was carrying on, and who were watching his
movements with lively interest. He was suddenly struck dumb with dismay
and astonishment when he heard of this unexpected issue of the affair,
and began to fear that he had "missed his providential way." His
assignees, however, seemed to think that they had got into _theirs_--and
enlarged the premises, and greatly increased the stock, profiting by the
continually augmenting popularity of Tag-rag. From the moment of this
dismal discovery, his ardor in the Great Cause wonderfully declined; and
he would have jumped at any decent excuse for getting out of the thing
altogether. And, indeed, when he came to think of it--where was the
difficulty? He had fought a good fight--he had maintained a great
principle--he had borne the heat and burden of the day!--But while the
martyr was thus musing within himself, powerful forces were coming into
the field to his succor--viz. the Society for the Promotion of Civil and
Religious Discord; who having caused all the proceedings against Tag-rag
to be laid before an ambitious little Radical Barrister, he discovered a
fatal flaw in them--viz. that in the _Significavit_, the word "Bishop"
was spelled "_Bisop_," (_i.e._ without the "h.") The point was argued
with prodigious pertinacity, and incredible ingenuity, by four counsel
on each side; each party vehemently declaring that if he failed, the
laws of England would be shaken to their very foundation: an intimation
which not a little agitated the court. After great deliberation,
however, the objection, "being in favor of liberty," was held to
prevail; all the proceedings were quashed; and Mr. Tag-rag was
consequently declared entitled to his discharge!--On this he was invited
to a grand tea-party by the leading friends of the voluntary principle,
given in Hackney Fields, where, amid a concourse of at least a hundred
souls, (including women and children,) Tag-rag (inwardly shuddering,
however, at the thought) avowed himself ready to go again to the stake,
"if Providence should require it." That seemed not, however, likely to
be the case; for the churchwardens, having already had to pay some
£1,750 odd in the shape of costs, resolved never to meddle with him any
more. He succeeded in prevailing on his assignees to take him into the
shop, in order to carry on the business upon their account, and as their
servant--for which they allowed him two pounds a-week. Out of this,
however, he was soon after compelled by the parish authorities to allow
twelve shillings a-week to Mrs. Tag-rag; and on making her the first
payment, he actually spit in the poor woman's face! Dr. Johnson used to
say that _patriotism_ was the last refuge of a scoundrel. Now-a-days,
however, it is _Church-rate Martyrdom_; and Tag-rag has had many
imitators!

I must not, however, conclude this part of my long history, without
adverting to what befell the surviving partners of Mr. Gammon, namely,
Messrs. Quirk and Snap. The former had horrible misgivings as to the
true cause of Mr. Gammon's death--having a strange inward persuasion
that he had destroyed himself. When he heard of the event, very
suddenly, from the laundress, he was seized with a fit of trembling
which lasted for several days. He dared not attend the funeral--or go to
Mr. Gammon's chambers, while his corpse lay there. Mr. Snap, however,
had younger and firmer nerves; and resolved to gratify his natural and
very delicate curiosity, by seeing "how Mr. Gammon looked in his
coffin." The day after the enlightened coroner's inquest had been held,
therefore, he went to the chambers for that purpose, and was shown by
the sobbing laundress into the silent and gloomy bedroom where the
remains of Mr. Gammon lay awaiting burial. The coffin lay on trestles
near the window, which of course was darkened; and Mr. Snap, having
taken off his hat, removed the coffin-lid and the face-cloth, and
_there_ was the cold stern countenance of Mr. Gammon, before him! In
spite of himself, Mr. Snap trembled as he looked, and for a moment
doubted whether in gazing at the _yellow effigy of him that was_, he
really beheld the late Mr. Gammon; so fixed, so rigid, were the
features--so contracted of their proportions, and disfigured by the
close-fitting frilled cap. What determination was yet visible in the
compressed lips! The once keen and searching eyes of Mr. Gammon were now
hid forever beneath the heavy and clammy eyelids; and the ample brow was
no longer furrowed by the workings of the active and powerful spirit
which had "jumped the world to come!" Mr. Snap gazed for several minutes
in silence, and his heart beat a little quicker than usual.

"Oh, sir!" sobbed the laundress at length, as she, too, advanced to look
again at the countenance of her deceased master, and from which she
seldom took her eyes long together when alone--"he was the kindest and
best of men! He was indeed!" Mr. Snap said nothing, but presently took
hold of the cold, thin, stiff fingers of Mr. Gammon's right hand,
squeezed them gently, and then replaced the hand in its former position.

"I hope he's happy, dear soul!" cried the laundress, gazing at him
through her tears.

"Yes, of course he is--no doubt," replied Mr. Snap, in a somewhat lower
tone of voice than he had spoken in before, and slowly returned to the
sitting-room; whither the laundress followed him as soon as she had
replaced the face-cloth and coffin-lid.

"Got a drop of brandy in the room, Mrs. Brown?" he inquired, and passed
his hand across his face, which had grown very pale.

She gave him what he asked for; he drank it, and sighed.

"Devilish ugly look that cap gives him--eh, Mrs. Brown? Hardly knew
him."

"Ay, poor soul; but it don't much signify how the _face_ looks if the
heart's all right. He was always so kind to me; I shall never get
another master like him!"

"Died _very_ suddenly, Mrs. Brown; didn't he?"

"Ay, he did, sir! His troubles broke his heart!"

"He'd quite enough of them to do so!" replied Snap, significantly, and
took his departure. He was one of the few who attended the funeral, and
the day on which it took place was the gloomiest he had ever known.

Mr. Gammon being gone, old Mr. Quirk seemed to have quite lost the use
of his head, and could attend to nothing. As for "the matters of the
affidavits," which he had been ordered by the Court of King's Bench to
answer, it was impossible to do so, except by acknowledging the facts
they stated to be true; and he was, in the ensuing term, struck off the
roll of attorneys, and ceased to be any longer a "gentleman, one of the
attorneys of our lord the king, before the king himself." In short, he
was completely broken up. He was quickly compelled to part with Alibi
House--in fact, with all his property; and very narrowly escaped being
thrown into a prison, there to end his days. During the last week of his
stay at Alibi House, while all his effects were being sold, he was
observed to sit down for hours together before a certain picture covered
with black crape; and once or twice he lifted up the crape, and gazed
with a horrid look at the object before him, as if he were meditating
something very mysterious and dismal. Nothing, however, happened. If he
had ever wished to hang himself, he never could succeed in screwing his
courage up to the sticking-place. He prevailed on a friend to buy in,
for him, that particular picture; and it was almost the only article
that he took with him to the small lodgings to which he removed with his
daughter, on the sale of Alibi House. As for poor Miss Quirk, I pity her
from my very soul; for, though rather a weak girl, she was perfectly
good-natured; and the reader will probably join in my indignation
against Mr. Toady Hug, when he hears that that gentleman, on seeing the
unfortunate turn which affairs took with Miss Quirk, owing to no fault
of hers, at the very moment when he ought to have clung closest to the
poor girl, deserted her, after having been engaged to be married to her
ever since the period of her having been disappointed of the affections
of Mr. Titmouse. It was, however, the business of the firm of Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, that he had desired to marry; and finding that it no
longer existed, he considered himself justified in rescinding the
contract on the ground of a failure of consideration. Snap, hearing of
this, instantly tendered his own "heart" in lieu of that of Mr. Hug--and
was accepted. He kept this very quiet, however, till the fate of the
action for a breach of promise of marriage, which he persuaded Miss
Quirk to allow him to bring in her name against Mr. Hug, should have
been decided--as it soon was; for I should have mentioned that no
attempt had been made by any one to strike _Snap_ off the rolls. He
retained a Mr. Heartbreak, a most eloquent counsel in such cases: and as
Mr. Toady Hug defended himself in what he imagined to be a very splendid
speech, the jury immediately found a verdict against him of five hundred
pounds--a little fortune for Miss Quirk, if Hug could have paid it. But
the fact was, that he could _not_; and after a long negotiation between
Snap and him, it was settled that there should be a sort of secret
partnership between them; and that Hug should work out the damages, by
doing Mr. Snap's business for a quarter only of the proper fees--the
full fee, however, for appearance's sake among his brethren, was to be
marked on his brief. Shortly after this Snap got married, and took a
little house in Saffron Hill, only two doors from the old office; and,
as he had always anxiously cultivated the acquaintance of the leading
thieves, he soon got into a very respectable connection. A year
afterwards, Mrs. Snap made him the happy father of a quaint-looking
little child; which, being a boy, his father, out of reverence for his
deceased friend and partner, Mr. Gammon, caused to be christened by the
name of "_Oily Snap_." Old Mr. Quirk lingered on for about a couple of
years longer, most inconveniently to Snap, when he died of a broken
heart; and as Snap assisted in depositing the revered remains of his
father-in-law in St. Andrew's church-yard, he could not help thinking
within himself what a _horrid_ thing it would be, were the old gentleman
to get up again, and come back and establish himself for another couple
of years, in their little back parlor!

Let us now, however, turn to characters worthier of our notice, of our
sympathy, and our congratulation.

Two or three days after the assembling of the new Parliament, Lord
Drelincourt was introduced by two of his brother barons, (one of whom
was Lord De la Zouch,) with the usual formalities, into the House of
Lords. As he stood at the table while being sworn in, tranquil and
dignified, there was such an expression of noble simplicity and
_goodness_ in his features--which had not even then, however, entirely
lost the traces of the anxiety and suffering through which he had passed
during the last three years--as touched me to the very soul; and I
fervently wished him health and long life to enjoy his new honors. He
looked quite commanding in his ample ermine and scarlet robes; and
having, with the pen which was tendered him, inscribed on the roll the
name "DRELINCOURT"--(that of very nearly the most ancient barony in
England)--and formally taken his seat on the barons' bench, and received
the congratulations of his brother peers who came crowding around
him--he stepped up to the woolsack, and grasped with silent energy the
hand of the new Lord Chancellor, Lord Wolstenholme, who, composed and
commanding in his appearance and bearing, and familiar with his position
as if he had occupied it for more years than _days_, welcomed the
newly-introduced peer with infinite warmth and cordiality. This was Sir
Charles Wolstenholme, the Attorney-General of a few short months before,
and he to whose masterly ability and unwavering friendship Lord
Drelincourt was mainly, if not indeed altogether, indebted for the
position which he then occupied. They sat talking together for some
time; and the Chancellor happening to mention the ludicrous and yet
intolerable pressure to which he was subject for everything he had to
give away--particularly in the _livings_ which fell to his
disposal--instanced a small one in Devonshire of four hundred a-year, of
which he had had notice only two hours before coming to the House, since
which time he had had upwards of a dozen applications for it from so
many peers then present! "Now, as a small _memento_ of to-day,
Drelincourt," said he, with a smile, "can you give me the name of any
man who wants, and in your judgment would suit, such a living?"

"Oh, my dear Lord Chancellor!" replied Lord Drelincourt, with eager
delight, "I know a man--a very able, exemplary, _starving_ friend of
mine, Mr. Neville--the Rev. Ralph Neville. He will do honor to your
choice!"

"'Tis his!" replied the Chancellor; "give me his name and address--he
shall have it offered him this very evening, if he live in town."

Lord Drelincourt, overjoyed, wrote down Mr. Neville's name and address,
and gave it to the Chancellor; and having reminded him that their dinner
hour was seven precisely, (the Chancellor had been for some time engaged
to dinner with him on that day,) Lord Drelincourt somewhat hastily
quitted the House, resolved to be himself the first bearer to poor Mr.
Neville of the delightful intelligence of his promotion. His carriage,
with Lady Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey in it, had been standing for some
time near the House, awaiting his return, in order to drive once or
twice round the Park before dinner; but you may guess the kind of
transport with which they heard him give directions for their being
driven to St. George's in the East, and the object of his errand. When
Lord Drelincourt's equipage--simple and elegant, and with the coronet
painted on the panels so small as not to _challenge_ the observation of
every passenger--drew up opposite the humble lodgings of Mr. Neville, he
and his little sick wife were sitting at tea, for which purpose he had a
few minutes before propped her up upon the sofa, on which she was
obliged to recline during the greater part of each day. Prettily
flustered were both of them on seeing the carriage roll up, the steps
let down, and hearing Lord Drelincourt, followed quickly by Lady
Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey, (it was the first time that they had seen
the former two except as Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey,) knock at the door. Oh,
how sweet was the office of communicating such news as that which they
had brought to Mr. and Mrs. Neville! He, on hearing it, turned
immediately, and as it were instinctively, to his pale suffering wife,
with full eye and quivering lip--and she returned the look he gave her!
Well he knew that the true source of her frail health was their
privation and miserably straitened circumstances, and that the
intelligence which they had just received, would, as it were, pour into
the broken heart the oil of gladness and of health. There was not the
slightest change in the deportment of his distinguished visitors; but
his own was, in spite of all he could do to the contrary, consciously
subdued, and a little embarrassed. What thankfulness was in his heart!
How was the great, barren, frowning world around him, turned into a
smiling paradise! No longer would they be unable to supply their few and
modest wants! No longer deny themselves the innocent enjoyments of life,
and cheerful intercourse with society! Soon would he be in the
independent exercise of the delightful duties of the pastoral office!
And what a thoughtfulness of their humble interests had been evinced by
Lord Drelincourt in the first moments of his own excitement and triumph!
To all parties, that was, indeed, an occasion of the outgoing of hearts
towards each other; and Lord and Lady Drelincourt, before leaving, had
insisted on seeing Mr. and Mrs. Neville at dinner in Dover Street,
before they left town, as they expected would shortly be the case.

As I have already intimated, Lord Drelincourt had that evening a select
dinner party; and there was a little incident connected with it, which
will, I think, serve to set forth, were it necessary, his considerate
good-nature. His guests consisted of the Lord Chancellor and Lady
Wolstenholme, Lord and Lady De la Zouch, Mr. Delamere, three or four
other friends, Mr. Runnington, and a Mr. Staveley, a former fellow-pupil
of Lord Drelincourt's, and whom he had left still studying closely in
the chambers of Mr. Mansfield. Lord Drelincourt had always entertained a
very friendly feeling towards Mr. Staveley, who was a young man of very
strong understanding, great industry, sound principle, and perfect
frankness and simplicity of character. Mr. Aubrey had from the first
observed the depression of spirits to which his companion was subject,
and which, in the course of their subsequent unreserved communications
with each other, he had discovered to be occasioned by the sad
precariousness of his pecuniary circumstances, and the absence of all
prospect or apparent chance of professional connection. It seemed that
the relative by whose liberality alone he had been enabled to enter
himself a student at Lincoln's Inn, and become a pupil of Mr.
Mansfield's, had died suddenly, leaving his nephew almost totally
destitute. Was it not likely that he was just such a person as would
excite the yearning sympathies of his now ennobled fellow-student?
Indeed it was so; and the reason of Lord Drelincourt's asking him to
dinner on the present occasion was, to give him a personal introduction
to two individuals capable of being hereafter of vast service to any
candidate (possessed of industry, energy, and talent) for professional
business and distinction; namely, Mr. Runnington, as a solicitor of
first-rate eminence, great personal respectability, and amiability of
character--and the Lord Chancellor; with both of whom, as may easily be
believed, Lord Drelincourt had much personal influence. Mr. Staveley was
the first guest that arrived, and he found Lord Drelincourt alone in the
drawing-room. His Lordship seized the opportunity of conversing with his
friend unrestrainedly upon the topics above alluded to, and of assuring
him that he might always rely on any good offices which it might be in
his Lordship's power to perform for him. He spoke to his desponding
companion in a tone of earnest and inspiriting encouragement. "Come,
come, my dear Staveley," said he, "_exporrige frontem_! It would seem to
be the tendency of close and solitary legal study to make a man despair,
and distrust the utility of his labors! But--go straight on!--Constancy,
honor, industry, and talent, will inevitably clear the way for their
possessor, and also in due time force him forward. Ah! believe me, I
know what your feelings are; for very recently I shared them, but always
endeavored to master them. As for the want of a connection, I can only
say that I knew but one attorney and solicitor in all London--my own--a
Mr. Runnington, (who dines with me to-day;)--but had I known none, I
should not have been disheartened, so long as I had health of body and
mind, and the means of pursuing my studies"----Here Lord Drelincourt's
quick ear caught a faint and half-suppressed sigh, uttered by his
companion.--"I did my best while engaged in the study of the law, and am
sure that I shall never have occasion to regret it; and I frankly tell
you, Staveley, I was as poor as a church mouse the whole time--over head
and ears in debt; and, but for the kindness of this very Mr. Runnington,
who lent me three hundred pounds, I never could have entered Mr.
Mansfield's chambers, or formed your acquaintance."--While saying this,
Lord Drelincourt was looking very keenly indeed at his companion.--"The
law," continued his Lordship, "is a noble profession! I should have
become an enthusiast in it had I continued to devote myself to its study
and practice;--by the way, will you accept, as a little _memento_ of our
friendship--which I trust you will not permit to be broken off,
Staveley--my few law-books? Of course, I have no further occasion for
those which relate to the more practical"----Here one of the doors
opened, and Lady Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey--oh, you beautiful
Kate!--entered, looking each of them exceedingly lovely, and receiving
Mr. Staveley with a charming cordiality and courtesy; for they had often
heard Lord Drelincourt mention his name. The other guests then made
their appearance, in quick succession; and Lord Drelincourt made a point
of introducing Mr. Staveley, in very flattering terms, to the
Chancellor, who received him with great urbanity, as indeed did Mr.
Runnington. 'Twas truly a delightful dinner party--all were in high
spirits. As for the Lord Chancellor, he took an opportunity during the
evening of pressing on Lord Drelincourt the acceptance of an important
office under the new government--one which they were exceedingly anxious
to have satisfactorily filled, and to which would be annexed a seat in
the cabinet!--Lord Drelincourt, however, firmly declined the brilliant
offer, on the plea of the repose which he felt to be requisite, both for
his family and himself, and also the attention due to his private
affairs, to which it would be necessary to devote his personal
superintendence for some time to come.--But to return for a moment to
Mr. Staveley. Soon after he had sat down to breakfast the next morning,
a servant of Lord Drelincourt's brought to his chambers a parcel, which,
in fact, consisted of the books of which his Lordship had begged his
acceptance over-night. With what peculiar interest did Mr. Staveley
glance over them, finding in every page slight pencil marks, evidencing
the careful reading of their former owner. In laying down the first book
which he had opened, something fell from it upon the floor, which, on
his picking it up, proved to be a letter addressed to himself, in the
handwriting of Lord Drelincourt. On opening it, what were his feelings
on seeing it contain an enclosure of a draft on his Lordship's banker
for the sum of £300, which he begged Mr. Staveley to accept as a loan,
to be repaid whenever and however he might think fit; and in terms of
the most earnest delicacy, reminding him of the circumstance which his
Lordship had named over-night; namely, his own acceptance of a similar
sum from Mr. Runnington. Mr. Staveley colored under a conflict of
emotions, which subsided quickly, into one strong and deep feeling of
gratitude towards his truly noble and generous friend; and that morning
he wrote a letter, acknowledging in fitting terms the munificent act of
Lord Drelincourt, and enclosing his note-of-hand for the amount; both of
which, however, on his receiving them, Lord Drelincourt, with a
good-natured smile, put into the fire, that there might exist no
evidence whatever of the transaction between himself and Mr. Staveley.
His Lordship did not even take Lady Drelincourt in this matter into his
confidence.

At length every arrangement had been made in London for their quitting
it, and at Yatton for their arrival. The last article of furniture, a
magnificent piano for Lady Drelincourt, had gone down a fortnight
before. Lord and Lady De la Zouch, together with Mr. Delamere, had been
at Fotheringham for some time; and the accounts which they gave in their
letters, of the scene which might be expected on the memorable occasion
of Lord Drelincourt's resuming possession of Yatton, threw them all into
a flutter of excitement. From Mr. Delamere's accounts, it would seem as
if the day _of their return_ was to be a sort of jubilee. He himself had
been to and fro twenty times between Yatton and Fotheringham; an entire
unanimity of feeling existed, it seemed, with reference to all the
leading arrangements, between himself, Mr. Griffiths, Dr. Tatham, Lord
and Lady De la Zouch, and the Earl and Countess of Oldacre, whom it had
been deemed expedient to take into their counsels upon the occasion; and
a difficult negotiation concerning a certain fine military band,
belonging to a regiment stationed only eleven miles off, had been
brought to a most satisfactory termination! Dr. Tatham wrote letters to
them, especially to Miss Aubrey, almost every day, and, in fact, they
all began to imagine themselves already at Yatton, and in the midst of
the delicious bustle that was going on there.

At length, the long-expected day for their setting off arrived--the 5th
day of May 18--. About ten o'clock in the forenoon might have been seen
standing, opposite Lord Drelincourt's door in Dover Street, two roomy
travelling carriages and four. Several newly engaged servants had gone
down two or three days before, in charge of a large van full of luggage;
and in the first carriage were going only Lord and Lady Drelincourt and
Miss Aubrey, his Lordship's valet and Lady Drelincourt's maid sitting in
the rumble behind; while the second carriage was occupied by little
Charles and Agnes, and their attendants, together with Harriet, Miss
Aubrey's faithful and pretty little maid. Everything being at length
ready, the word was given, crack went the whips, and away they rolled on
their memorable and exciting journey. There was an evident air of
expectation and interest along the road, for a long while before they
approached Yatton; for in fact it was generally known that Lord
Drelincourt, who, it was believed, had passed through a series of
romantic adventures, was going down to take possession of the ancient
family estate in Yorkshire. How the hearts of the travellers yearned
towards the dear old familiar objects on each side of the road, which,
as they advanced at a rapid pace, they passed with increasing frequency!
At length they reached the last posting-house, which was within twelve
miles of Yatton, and where there were manifest symptoms of preparation
and stir. Eight very fine horses were brought out in a twinkling, and
the harness appeared both new and gay. Mrs. Spruce, the landlady,
together with her two daughters, all of them dressed with unusual
smartness, stood at the inn door, courtesying repeatedly; and on Lady
Drelincourt and Kate seeing them, they beckoned them to the carriage
door, and inquired after their health, with such a kindness and interest
in their manner, as almost brought tears into their eyes.

"So you have not forgotten us, Mrs. Spruce?" asked Lord Drelincourt,
with a gay smile, as they handed a couple of glasses of water into the
carriage, at the request of Lady Drelincourt and Kate, who were
evidently getting very nervous with their proximity to Yatton, and the
exciting scenes which must there be awaiting them.

"Oh, my Lord, forgotten your Lordship! No, my Ladies, not for one minute
since the dismal day you all went--my Lord! There's _such_ a stir, my
Ladies, along the road--you'll see it all when you get a mile farther
on!--Of course, your Lordship and your Ladyships know what's going to be
done at the Hall"----

"Ah, ah! so I hear! Well--good-day, Mrs. Spruce!" cried Lord
Drelincourt, and the next moment they had dashed off, in their last
stage, and at a thundering pace, to be sure. It was nearly twelve
o'clock at noon, and the day was bright and beautiful--and there was a
fresh and exhilarating breeze stirring, which oft came laden with the
rich scents of summer fields.

"Oh Agnes! oh Kate! what a contrast is this to the day on which our
horses' heads, two years ago, were turned the other way!" exclaimed Lord
Drelincourt; but received only a faint reply, for his companions were
getting flurried and restless with the rapidly increasing evidences of
excitement on the road. As they advanced, they overtook vehicles of
every description, all containing people in gay holiday trim, and all
with their horses' heads turned one way; viz. towards the great centre
of attraction, Yatton. At length the augmenting number of carriages,
chaises, cars, gigs, vans, carts, wagons--many of them decked with
ribbons, flowers, and laurel boughs--compelled them to slacken their
speed, and gave them fuller opportunities of witnessing the joyful
enthusiasm with which their approach was greeted. Already they heard, or
imagined they heard, from the direction of Yatton, the sounds of voices
and music.

"I'm sure, Charles, I shall cry like a child"--quoth Kate, her eyes
suddenly filling with tears; and such was the case also with Lady
Drelincourt.

"And what, Kate, if you do?" cried her brother, joyfully, kissing and
embracing them affectionately.

"Charles! Charles!--I declare there's old Granny Grimston--it is
indeed!" cried Kate, eagerly, as they passed an old-fashioned
market-cart, in which sat, sure enough, the good creature Miss Aubrey
had mentioned, beside her daughter, to whom Kate waved her hand
repeatedly--for the former had been an old pensioner of the late Mrs.
Aubrey's.

Oh, what a sight burst upon them as soon as they had reached the turning
of the road which brought them full in view of Yatton--the village and
the Hall! They came, too, to a dead stand-still--'twas impossible to get
on for some time, for they seemed to have got suddenly into the middle
of some great fair! What a shout rent the air! Boughs of laurel were
waving in all directions, with wreaths and ribbons! Beautiful nosegays
were flung in through the carriage windows by men, women, and even
children, all dressed in their best and gayest attire! Here was formed
an equestrian procession that was to precede them into Yatton,
consisting of some hundred stout Yorkshire yeomen, chiefly tenants of
Lord Drelincourt and his neighbors. Louder and louder came the shouts of
welcome from all quarters, before and behind, intermingled at length, as
they entered the village, with the clash and clangor of cymbals, the
thundering of drums, the sounds of trumpets, trombones, clarionets, and
shrill inspiriting fifes. 'Twas really most exciting; and Lady
Drelincourt and Kate were already amply fulfilling their own
predictions. Their carriage suddenly stopped for some moments; and a
louder shout than had till then been heard, burst around them, while the
military band approached playing "Rule Britannia!" followed by a
procession of at least two hundred horsemen, headed by Delamere, and all
wearing his bright blue election colors! He thrust his hand into the
carriage, and grasping those of each of them, again rode off. Here an
attempt was made to take the horses out of Lord Drelincourt's carriage,
which he peremptorily forbade, acknowledging, however, the affectionate
enthusiasm which prompted the proposal, by repeatedly bowing in all
directions as they passed down the village. Flags and branches of laurel
hung from almost every window, and the crowd had become so great as to
prevent them frequently from moving on for more than a minute or two
together. At length they saw the dear old church, with its long, thin,
gray spire--no doubt its little bells were ringing as loudly as they
could be rung, but they were not heard; for the band at that moment,
when within a few yards of the park gates, struck up in fine style the
inspiriting air of "The King shall hae his ain again!" A great number of
carriages were drawn up on each side of the entrance to the park, and
the high antique iron gates and stone pillars were covered with wreaths
of flowers and branches of laurel. Immediately within the gates, on each
side, upon forms and stools, sat about a dozen of the oldest tenants on
the estate, male and female, who, on the approach of Lord Drelincourt,
lifted up their hands feebly towards heaven, while tears ran down their
eyes, and they implored a blessing on those who were re-entering their
own, after so long and cruel a separation from it. But here the eager
and affectionate eyes of the travellers lit upon an object infinitely
more interesting and affecting than any they had yet seen--'twas the
venerable figure of Dr. Tatham, who, with his hat off, stood with his
hand and his face elevated momentarily towards heaven, imploring a
blessing upon those who were approaching. Lord Drelincourt instantly
called for the carriage door to be opened, and within a moment or two's
time, he had grasped the little doctor's hands in his own; and Lady
Drelincourt and Kate, having also hastily alighted, had thrown their
arms around him, and kissed him, with the feelings of two daughters
towards a fond and venerated father. The little doctor was quite
overcome, and could scarcely say a word--indeed, they were all much
excited. At this point came up Mr. Delamere, who had dismounted at the
gate, and placing Kate's arm hastily, and with a proud and triumphant
air, within his own, while Lady Drelincourt was supported between her
husband and Dr. Tatham, the two children following, with their
attendants, immediately behind--in this manner they approached the Hall,
each side of the avenue being lined with the gayly-dressed gentry of the
neighborhood, collected from far and wide. When they reached the fine
old gateway, there shot up suddenly into the air, upon a flag-staff
planted upon the centre of the turret, a splendid crimson banner, while
the band within the court-yard struck up the spirit-stirring air, one
which no Englishman can listen to without emotion--"See the conquering
hero comes!" The moment that they had passed under the gateway, what a
gay and brilliant scene presented itself! Upon the steps fronting the
door, and indeed all around, stood the most distinguished persons in the
county, ready to greet the new-comers. There was the Lord-Lieutenant,
the High Sheriff, two of the county Members--Catholics and
Protestants--high Tories and high Whigs--there they were--the high-born,
the beautiful--the gifted, the good--all crowding with eager and
enthusiastic welcome around those who were thus returning to their own,
after so extraordinary and infamous an exclusion and banishment. To Lady
Drelincourt, to Miss Aubrey, to Lord Drelincourt himself, amid the
overpowering excitement of the moment, it appeared as though they were
in a vivid and dazzling dream; and they felt completely confused and
bewildered. Lady De la Zouch, and one or two others of their considerate
friends, observing the painful emotions with which Lady Drelincourt and
Miss Aubrey were very nearly overcome, succeeded in withdrawing them
for a while from the tumultuous scene into their chambers.

A splendid cold collation was spread in the hall for the immediate
friends and guests of Lord Drelincourt, while an immense entertainment,
of a more substantial description, was prepared under an awning, upon
the beautiful terrace at the back of the Hall, for about three hundred
people, consisting principally of the tenantry, their families and
friends. (Half-a-dozen feasts were going on in the village, for those
who were necessarily--from want of room--excluded from the terrace
tables.) The substantial business of the day--viz. feasting--was to
commence, both for gentle and simple, at three o'clock, shortly before
which period Lady Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey appeared in the
drawing-room, and then in the hall, infinitely the better for their
refreshing toilets. 'Tis true that their eyes looked somewhat impaired
by the excessive emotions occasioned by the events of the day--for they
had both been several times, during their brief absence, on the verge of
hysterics; yet for all that they looked a pair of as lovely women as
dear Old England, rich in delicate beauty as it is, could produce. They
both wore plain white muslin dresses, with small blue rosettes, which
Lady De la Zouch had intimated would give a certain person infinite
gratification--meaning the new member for the borough; for his colors
were blue--whereof there was a modest glimpse in his own surtout. Lord
Drelincourt also appeared greatly the better for his visit to his
dressing-room, and was in the highest possible spirits--as well he might
be, amid a scene so glorious and triumphant as that around him; all
people, high and low, rich and poor, without distinction of party, vying
with one another in doing him honor, and welcoming him back to the halls
of his ancestors. At length, it being announced that all was in
readiness, before sitting down to their own banquet, Lord Drelincourt,
with Lady Drelincourt on one arm, and his sister on the other, and
followed by Dr. Tatham, Mr. Runnington, and almost all his guests,
passed along under the old archway that led over the bridge to the
terrace, in order that the doctor might say grace before the feast
began: and the instant that Lord and Lady Drelincourt and Miss Aubrey
made their appearance, the shouting and clapping of hands, and waving of
handkerchiefs, that ensued, defies description, completely overpowering
Lady Drelincourt and Kate, and somewhat disturbing the equanimity of
Lord Drelincourt himself. 'Twas several minutes before the least
cessation occurred. At length, however, Mr. Griffiths, the steward, who
was to preside on the occasion, succeeded in directing attention to Dr.
Tatham, who stood uncovered ready to say grace, which he did as soon as
there was a decent approach to silence; he and those who had accompanied
him, then returning to the Hall. What a prodigious onslaught was
instantly made on the enormous masses of beef, boiled and roast--the
hams, the tongues, the fowls--and all the innumerable other good things
which were heaped upon those hospitable tables. There was ale _ad
libitum_; and, in addition to that, a bottle of port and of sherry to
each mess of four, which latter luxuries, however, were generally
reserved for the business which was to take place after the substantial
part of the feast had been discussed.

According to a previous arrangement, about four o'clock intimation was
given to the vast party upon the terrace, that Lord Drelincourt,
accompanied by his guests, would come and take their seats for a short
time at the head of the tables--his Lordship occupying the place of Mr.
Griffiths. After a great bustle the requisite space was obtained at the
head of the nearest table; and presently Dr. Tatham led in Lady
Drelincourt, and Mr. Delamere, Kate; followed by Lord Drelincourt and
all his visitors--their arrival being greeted in the same enthusiastic
manner as before. After they had selected their places, but before they
had sat down, Dr. Tatham returned thanks amid a sudden and decorous
silence; and then all, having resumed their seats, had an opportunity of
feasting their eager and fond eyes with the sight of those who had been
so cruelly torn from them, and so long estranged. Lord Drelincourt sat
at the head of the table, with Lady Drelincourt on one side and his
sister upon the other, both looking exceedingly animated and beautiful.
Beside Kate sat Mr. Delamere, his eyes greedily watching her every look
and motion; and beside Lady Drelincourt sat the venerable Dr. Tatham,
looking as happy and as proud as it was possible for him to look. After
sitting for some minutes conversing with those immediately around him,
during which time expectation had gradually hushed down the noise which
had prevailed on their entering, Lord Drelincourt slowly poured out a
glass of wine, his hand slightly trembling; and while Lady Drelincourt
and Kate leaned down their heads, and hid their faces, he slowly rose,
amid respectful and anxious silence. His voice was at all times clear
and melodious, his enunciation distinct and deliberate; so that every
word he uttered could be heard by all present. There were grace and
dignity in his countenance and gestures; and you felt, as you looked and
listened to him, that he was speaking from his heart. Thus he spoke:--

"Oh, my friends! what a happy moment is this to me and mine! What thanks
do I not owe to God for His great goodness in bringing us again together
in our former relations of mutual and uninterrupted respect and
affection! You must not, however, expect me to say much now, for I
cannot, because my heart is so full of love and respect to those whom I
see around me, and of gratitude to God. May He, my dear friends, who is
now beholding us, and marking the thoughts of our hearts, bless and
preserve you all, and enable me never to give you cause to regret having
thus affectionately welcomed me back again to my home! It pleased Him,
my friends, that I, and those whom you see near me, and whom I so
tenderly love, should be torn away suddenly, and for a long time, from
all that our hearts held dear. The pangs it cost us--bear with me, my
friends--the pangs it cost us"--here Lord Drelincourt was obliged to
pause for some moments. "We have, since we left you all, gone through
much affliction, a little privation, and some persecution. It was all,
however, God's ordering, and we have besought Him that we might at all
times feel and know it to be so, in order that we might never be
impatient or rebellious. Ah, my friends! He is wiser and kinder in His
dealings with us than we are often able to see; and as for myself, I
think I can say that I would not have lost the lessons which my recent
sufferings have taught me, for a thousand times my present advantages.

"What has befallen me has satisfied me, and I hope you too, of the
slight hold we have of those advantages, of which we consider ourselves
surest. Who can tell, dear friends, what a day or an hour may bring
forth? And I hope I have also learned one of the great lessons of life,
better than I knew it before--that cheerful resignation to the will of
God is the only source of fortitude! God loves the voice of praise which
He hears _from the desert_! Never, dear friends, when we are in our
deepest difficulties and troubles--never, NEVER let us despair! Thank
God, I never did, or you would not perhaps have seen me here to-day. God
overrules everything for the real good of those who faithfully obey Him:
and in our own case, I can assure you, that the very things which we
looked upon as the cruellest and hardest to bear of all that had
happened to us, turned out to be the very means by which we have been
restored to the happiness which we are now met to celebrate! See how
good God has been to us! When I look around me, and see what I am
permitted to enjoy, and know what I _deserve_, I tremble.

"You all know, of course, that it has pleased God to place us a little
higher in point of mere worldly station than we were before; but I think
you will find that it has made only this difference in us; namely, that
we are more sensible of the importance of the duties which we have to
perform. 'Tis not, dear friends--I deeply feel--the mere coronet which
confers true distinction, but _how it is worn_. I, of course, have only
succeeded by birth, and, apparently, by accident, to that mark of
distinction which the merit of some other person had won for him long
ago. I trust I shall wear it with honor and humility, and that so--" he
paused for a moment,--"will my son, after me.

"And now, my dear friends, I must conclude. You see how much those who
are sitting near me are affected." Lord Drelincourt glanced fondly but
hastily at Lady Drelincourt and his sister, paused for some time, and
then in a lower tone resumed. "You may remember, some of you at least,
the evening before we left Yatton; what you then said to me"--here again
he paused, and for some time. "I have never forgotten that evening; the
thought of it has often been like balm poured into a broken heart.

"I have heard that since I left you all, things have gone very
differently from the way they went in my time. Oh, dear friends, there
shall be no more extortion--there shall be no more oppression, at
Yatton! I can, I think, answer for myself; and I think my little son
will not take after his father if--you shall see my children
presently--God bless you, dear friends! You see that I have now and
then been overcome while speaking; I know you will bear with me. Were
you in my place, and to look upon those whom I now look upon, you also
would be overcome. But let our tears now pass away! Rejoice, dear
friends, for it is a day of rejoicing! Be merry! be happy! I now from my
heart drink--we all drink--all your healths! Here are health, and peace,
and prosperity to you all! God bless you all!--God bless you all!"

Lord Drelincourt raised his glass to his lips, and drank off the wine it
contained, his hand visibly trembling the while. He then sat down,
evidently much subdued; and as for Lady Drelincourt, Miss Aubrey, and
Lady De la Zouch--nay, everybody present--they were deeply affected by
the simple and affectionate address that had fallen from Lord
Drelincourt; and which was followed by a long silence, infinitely more
expressive than the most vociferous responses. After a while, the band
commenced playing, in a very beautiful manner,

                "Should auld acquaintance be forgot."

There were heard several attempts, from time to time, from different
quarters, to join in the chorus, but they were very faint and subdued;
and Lord Drelincourt, perceiving the true state of the case, suddenly
covered his face with his hands, and appeared for some moments
powerfully affected. Then, affectionately taking the hands of Kate and
Lady Drelincourt, he fondly whispered, that all their past sufferings
were surely that day richly recompensed; and fearing lest his presence,
and that of his distinguished guests, might be a check upon the freedom
and hilarity of the great company before him, he rose, and bowing
courteously to all around, and followed by those who had accompanied
him, withdrew amid most vehement and prodigious cheering. A few minutes
afterwards, according to Lord Drelincourt's promise, little Charles and
Agnes were led in amid a thousand exclamations of fondness and
admiration, (they were really very beautiful children;) and having had a
little drop of wine poured into each of their cups, they drank timidly,
as they were told, to the health of all present, and then skipped
hastily back whence they had come.

I shall not detain the reader, with whom I am so soon about to part
forever, with the description which I had prepared of the opening of
Kate's school on the morrow; though I think he would like to have been
present. A prettier one there is not in England; and if anything could
have increased Kate's love for him who had taken such pains to please
her in the matter, it was Dr. Tatham's informing her, a morning or two
afterwards, that Mr. Delamere had endowed her school with fifty pounds
a-year, forever. In proportion to Kate's sorrow on leaving her school,
upon the occasion of their all being driven from Yatton, it may easily
be believed, were her delight and gratitude, for this its complete and
more efficient restoration. The opening of it by Dr. Tatham, in her
presence, and also in that of Mr. Delamere, was doubtless an interesting
ceremony, yet not to be compared, perhaps, with one that occurred a
short month afterwards at Yatton, and in which the same three persons
were principally concerned!

       *       *       *       *       *

----Here is a heavenly morning in June! and Kate lying trembling and
with beating heart, alone, in that old-fashioned chamber of hers, in
which she was first seen by the reader--or at least, where he obtained a
faint and dim vision of her.--'Tis very early, certainly; and as Kate
hath passed a strange, restless night, she is at length closing her eyes
in sleep; and as nothing is to be heard stirring, save yonder lark, that
is carrying his song higher and higher out of hearing every moment, she
will sleep for a while undisturbed.

       *       *       *       *       *

--But _now_, rise, Kate! rise! It is your wedding morning! Early
though it be, here are your fair bridemaids seeking admittance, to deck
you in your bridal robes! Sweet Kate, why turn so pale, and tremble so
violently? It is truly a memorable day, one long looked forward to with
a fluttering heart--a day of delicious agitation and embarrassment; but
courage, Kate! courage! Cannot these three beautiful girls who, like the
Graces, are arraying you, as becomes your loveliness, with all their
innocent arts and archness, provoke one smile on your pale cheek? Weep,
then, if such be your humor; for it is the overflowing of joy, and will
relieve your heart!--But hasten! hasten! your lover is below, impatient
to clasp you in his arms! The maids of the village have been up with the
sun, gathering sweet flowers to scatter on your way to the altar! Hark,
how merrily, merrily ring the bells of Yatton church!--Nearer and nearer
comes the hour which cannot be delayed; and why, blushing and trembling
maiden, should you dread its approach? Hark--carriage after carriage is
coming crashing up to the Hall!--Now your maidens are placing on your
beautiful brow the orange blossoms--mysterious emblems:--

          "The fruits of autumn, and the flowers of spring"--

and a long, flowing, graceful veil, shall conceal your blushes!--Now, at
length, she descends--and sinks into the arms of a fond and noble
brother, whose heart is too full for speech, as is that of her sister!
Shrink not, my beauteous Kate, from your lover, who approaches you, see
how tenderly and delicately! Is he not one of whom a maiden may be
proud? See the troops of ardent friends waiting to attend you, and do
you honor! Everywhere that the eye looks, are glistening gay wedding
favors, emblems of innocence and joy. Come, Kate--your brother waits;
you go with _him_ to church, but you will come back with ANOTHER! He who
loves you as a father, the venerable minister of God, is awaiting your
arrival! What a brilliant throng is in that little church!

Now her beautiful form is standing at the altar, beside her manly lover,
and the solemn ceremony has commenced, which is to unite, with Heaven's
awful sanction, these two young and happy and virtuous hearts!

'Tis done! Kate Aubrey! Kate Aubrey! where are you? She is no more--but,
as Mrs. Delamere, is sitting blushing and sobbing beside HER HUSBAND, he
elate with pride and fondness, as they drive rapidly back to the Hall.
In vain glances her eye at that splendid banquet, as it shrinks also
timidly from the glittering array of guests seated around it--and she
soon retires with her maidens to prepare for her agitating journey!

Well, they are gone! My pure and lovely Kate is gone! 'Tis hard to part
with her! But blessings attend her! Blessings attend you both! You
cannot forget dear YATTON, where all that is virtuous and noble will
ever with open arms receive you!

       *       *       *       *       *

    And now dear friends! farewell for many a day!
    If e'er we meet again, I cannot say.
    Together have we travell'd two long years,
    And mingled sometimes smiles, and sometimes tears!
    Now droops my weary hand, and swells my heart,--
    I fear, good friends! we must forever part.
    Forgive my many faults! and say of me,
    He hath _meant_ well, that writ this history.




NOTES.


[Footnote 1: NOTE 1. Page 46.

"The show of hands" (says Lord Stowell, in _Anthony v. Seager_, 1 Hag.
Cons. Rep. 13) "is only a rude and imperfect declaration of the
sentiments of the electors."]


[Footnote 2: NOTE 2. Page 72.

The time within which a petition against the return of a member of
Parliament must be presented, has, for the last two centuries, been a
fortnight after the meeting of Parliament, or the return of the member.
This still continues the limited period. See stat. 2 and 3 Vict. c. 31,
§ 2. The allusion in the text, therefore, is to the day _after_ that,
beyond which a petition could not be presented; and if Gammon, on or
after that fifteenth day, had paid money for their votes to the members
of the Quaint Club, he might have done it with impunity, as far as
concerned the perilling Mr. Titmouse's seat. The legislature has lately,
however, made great exertions to put down the system of bribing; and by
statute 5 and 6 Vict. c. 102, passed on the 19th August 1842, has
invested the House of Commons with very formidable powers for that
purpose. If petitioners on the score of bribery, fearful of the strength
of the case which may be brought against themselves on the same ground,
agree with their opponents to abandon the charge of bribery, and
compromise the matter, the committee may nevertheless inquire into the
whole matter, and report the result to the House. And by the fourth and
fifth section of that act, a petition complaining of bribery may be
presented at any time _after_ the first fourteen days of the meeting of
Parliament, and within three calendar months next after some one or more
of the alleged acts of bribery shall have been committed; and the
inquiries of the committee are limited to acts of bribery committed
within three months before presenting the petition. The entire system of
election law has been also remodelled by several very recent statutes,
as will be explained in the next note.]


[Footnote 3: NOTE 3. Page 87.

For this purpose each party, attended by their counsel, agents, and
political friends, immediately withdrew to separate rooms, to fix upon
the eleven names which they would strike off. Having done this, they met
in a third room, before an officer of the House; and struck off name by
name alternately, till the thirty-three were reduced to eleven.--This
process was called "_Knocking out the brains of the Committee_:" for as
each party's object was to get rid of a decided and known political
opponent, the abler and more eminent he was, the greater the necessity
for getting rid of him. Those left were the more obscure members of the
House.]


[Footnote 4: NOTE 4. Page 87.

The process of forming an election committee, as described in the text,
fell several times under the author's personal observation--in his
professional capacity--as late as till within the last five years, [this
note being written in 1845.] It was prescribed by a statute, which since
its enactment has been repeatedly amended and re-enacted, known by the
name of "THE GRENVILLE ACT," (stat. 10 Geo. III. c. 16.) It was long
regarded as a very masterly and successful mode of securing an impartial
committee. Thus speaks of it, for instance, Mr. Justice Coleridge, in a
note to his edition of _Blackstone's Commentaries_, (Vol. i. p. 187,
note 31:)--"This statute is justly celebrated for the wisdom and utility
of its provisions. One of its principal _objects_ is, to secure a fair
election of petition committees." This eulogy was penned in the year
1825; but even admitting it to have been _then_ justified by the working
of the system, its defects became subsequently the object of universal
regret and reprobation. For some years subsequently to the passing of
the Reform Bill, this constitution of election committees--depicted in
the text with rigorous fidelity--led to intolerable abuse, and merited
scandal and reproach. In the year 1844, after a previous ineffectual
remodelling of the system, was passed statute 7 and 8 Vict. c. 103,
entitled "An Act to amend the law for the trial of controverted
elections of members to serve in Parliament," (passed 9th August
1844,)--which created an entirely new system for the selection of these
committees--of which the following is an outline.--At the beginning of
every session, the Speaker appoints a "_general Committee of
Elections_," consisting of six members, who must be approved of by the
House--and then their appointment continues to the end of the session. A
list is then made of all the members of the House, liable to serve on
election committees, which is referred to this general committee; and
they select from it a certain number, not exceeding twelve, whom they
deem qualified to act as _chairmen_ of election committees; and who are
thereupon neither liable, nor eligible, to serve as _private_ members of
such committees. This body is called "the _Chairmen's Panel_." The
remaining members of the House, liable to serve, are then divided into
_five_ panels, of equal numbers; and the order in which these five
panels are to serve, is decided by lot, openly, by the clerk of the
House, at the table.--All election petitions are then referred to the
_general committee_, whose duty it is to select from the five panels,
according to the order in which they may have been drawn, FOUR members,
who are to serve as a select committee to try the petition referred to
them, in the order in which that petition may happen to stand in the
list of petitions--which is to be framed according to the provisions of
the Act in question. On the same day on which the general committee thus
choose the private members of the committee, but without knowing who
have been so chosen, the members of the _chairmen's panel_ select one of
their number to act as _chairman_ of the select committee; returning his
name to the general committee, as soon as the latter shall have informed
the chairmen's panel that the _four_ members have been chosen. When all
these arrangements have been completed, the parties in attendance are
called into the House, and the names of the chairman and the four
members read over to them; whereupon they withdraw, and this committee
of FIVE then proceed, in due course, to try the petition. If, through
illness, or other allowed excuse, the number should be reduced from five
to less than three, the committee is dissolved--unless the parties
choose to go on with _two_ members, or even ONE, who in such case will
lawfully constitute the committee.--Such is the scheme, devised with
anxious ingenuity, which has recently been adopted by the legislature,
for the all-important purpose of securing impartial election committees.
That it is a vast improvement on the system described in the text, seems
certain; but what will be its practical working, time alone can show.]


[Footnote 5: NOTE 5. Page 117.

These offences are now dealt with much more seriously; several late
statutes empowering the police magistrates to fine the offenders, and
even commit them to the tread-mill. The effect has been to interfere
seriously with this species of nocturnal amusement.]


[Footnote 6: NOTE 6. Page 227.

The reader will bear in mind, that, as explained in a note to the first
volume, arrest on mesne process was abolished a few years ago, by
statute 1 and 2 Vict. c. 110, (passed 16th August 1838.) The policy of
abandoning this system did not secure the unanimous approbation of the
Common Law Commissioners. One of the most learned of them dissented from
the report recommending the abolition of the system, and embodied his
reasons in a very elaborate supplemental report. That arrest on mesne
process was the means of inflicting an inconceivable amount of
unjustifiable suffering, and was often a mere vehicle for oppression--is
indisputable. The abolition of arrest on _final_ process stands on very
different grounds.]


[Footnote 7: NOTE 7. Page 241.

This is _now_ very far otherwise. Legal proceedings have been recently
prodigiously accelerated.]


[Footnote 8: NOTE 8. Page 241.

The reason why neither a Peer nor a Member of Parliament can be bail is,
that they are not liable to the ordinary process of the courts.--(Tidd's
_Practice_, p. 247, 9th ed.) The reason why attorneys and their clerks
cannot be bail, is to protect them from the importunities of their
clients.]


[Footnote 9: NOTE 9. Page 245.

_I. e._ "Special Jury."]


[Footnote 10: NOTE 10. Page 245.

A writ of _certiorari_ issues from the Court of Queen's Bench in
criminal cases, for the purpose of removing them into it from inferior
courts; and when the writ is granted, as it may be at the instance of
either the prosecutor or defendant, it entirely supersedes the
jurisdiction of the inferior court, and renders all subsequent
proceedings in it entirely erroneous and illegal--unless the Court of
Queen's Bench should think fit to remand the record to the inferior
court. A _prosecutor_ may obtain a certiorari as a matter of right; but
a defendant only at the discretion of the court.]


[Footnote 11: NOTE 11. Page 275.

Forgery was a capital offence down to the year 1830. By statute 1 and 2
Will. IV. c. 66, passed on the 23d July in that year, and statute 2 and
3 Will. IV. c. 123, passed on the 16th August 1832; and particularly by
statute 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict. c. 84, passed on the 17th July 1837, the
punishment of death is abolished in all cases of forgery, and
transportation for life, or for years, or imprisonment, with solitary
confinement and hard labor, substituted.]


[Footnote 12: NOTE 12. Page 295.

Hamlet.]


[Footnote 13: NOTE 13. Page 298.

Bribery at elections of members of Parliament was always an offence _at
common law_, punishable by indictment and information; but there are no
traces of any prosecutions at common law for such an offence. In the
year 1729 the legislature interfered, and, by stat. 2 Geo. II. c. 24,
inflicted the penalties which were sought to be recovered by the actions
mentioned in the text. Mr. Rogers, in his excellent treatise on
_Election Law_, says that it is not difficult to account for the silence
of the books of common law on the subject of bribery. When the increase
of money, and the growing importance of a seat in the House of Commons,
gave rise to a frequent commission of this offence, the House began to
assert its exclusive judicial power over all matters affecting the
election of its members--and punished bribery as one of the highest
offences affecting the freedom of elections. Having thus made it a
matter of _privilege_, it would have been dangerous for prosecutors to
carry their complaints to any other tribunal. Even since the passing of
the Act in question, however, numerous cases are on record of
proceedings for bribery, by indictment and information--at the instance,
not only of private persons, but of the attorney-general prosecuting by
order of the House; which latter power has been greatly extended by the
statute referred to in a former note.--With reference to the particular
transaction of Gammon with Ben Bran, narrated in a former page, viz.
_promising after_ the election to pay the Quaint Club for the votes they
had given--that alone was held, in the case of _Lord Huntingtower_ v.
_Gardiner_, 1 Barn. & Or., 297, (A.D. 1823,) not to be an offence within
the statute 2 Geo. II. c. 24, § 27. But Gammon, it will be borne in
mind, had been fatally implicated, by his negotiation with the club for
the purchase of their votes, _before_ the day of the election. The
penalties sued for in the text, are to be understood as having been due
in respect of offences committed by other cases of bribery, as already
explained, than those affecting the Quaint Club.]


[Footnote 14: NOTE 14. Page 307.

The system of joint-stock companies' speculation, as described in the
foregoing and subsequent pages of the text, so far from being an
exaggeration, falls far short of a complete illustration of the
stupendous scale of swindling which has, during the last ten or fifteen
years, been tolerated in this great commercial country. At length,
however, in the year 1844, the legislature has struck a blow calculated
to demolish the whole fabric, or, at all events, prevent any similar
erection. By statute 7 and 8 Vict. c. 110, entitled, "An Act for the
Registration, Incorporation, and Regulation of Joint-stock Companies,"
passed on the 5th Sept. 1844; and by act 7 and 8 Vict. c. 111, entitled,
"An Act for facilitating the winding up the affairs of Joint-stock
Companies, unable to meet their engagements," passed on the same
day--such restrictions are placed upon fraud and improvidence, as are
calculated to paralyze much of their powers of practising upon public
credulity. Publicity and responsibility are two objects which are
effectually attained by the combined operation of these acts, which are
masterpieces of commercial legislation.]


[Footnote 15: NOTE 15. Page 367.

_I. e._--The proctors' setting forth of their client's name and
interest.]


[Footnote 16: NOTE 16. Page 392.

See the note to a preceding page in this volume, (_ante_, p. 307,) where
an explanation is given of the salutary change recently effected by the
legislature, in the law of joint-stock companies.]


[Footnote 17: NOTE 17. Page 415.

The present punishment of bigamy [or polygamy as, says Blackstone, (4
Comm. 163,) it ought to be called] is fixed by statute 9 Geo. IV. c. 31,
§ 22, which declares the offence of bigamy (whether the second marriage
have taken place in England or elsewhere) to be a felony liable to
transportation for seven years, and imprisonment with or without hard
labor, for any term not exceeding two years; subject, however, to a
proviso that the act shall not apply to any of the following cases: 1.
The case of a second marriage contracted out of England by any other
than a British subject. 2. The case of a person marrying again where
husband or wife shall have been continually absent from that person for
seven years then last past, and shall not have been known by such person
to be living during that time. 3. The case of any person who, at the
time of the second marriage, shall have been divorced _a vinculo_ from
the first marriage, or whose former marriage shall have been declared
void by any court of competent jurisdiction.

The meaning of the second of these exceptions is, that the husband or
wife shall not have been known by the other party at any period during
the seven years to be alive. _Regina_ v. _Cullen_, 9 _Car. & P._, 681.]


[Footnote 18: NOTE 18. Page 416.

It has been recently decided (the King _v._ Inhabitants of Wraxton, 4
Barn. and Adol., 640,) that to render a marriage invalid on the ground
stated in the text, _both parties_ must be aware of the false name being
adopted. See also, Wiltshire _v._ Prince, 3 Hagg. Ecc. Rep., 332.]


[Footnote 19: NOTE 19. Page 422.

Signing is not necessary to the validity of a bond or deed at Common
Law. The essential requisites are--_sealing and delivery_. See a very
interesting explanation of these matters in Vol. ii. pp. 305 _et seq._
of _Blackstone's Commentaries_.]


[Footnote 20: NOTE 20. Page 426.

An attorney cannot be thus compelled to answer matters _which would
amount to an indictable offence_; for that would be compelling him to
criminate himself. Upon this ground, applications like that in the text
are often discharged; but it affords no protection to an attorney where
the application is, not to show cause why he should not answer the
matter in the affidavit, but why he should not be struck off the 28th
roll.--See the distinction clearly explained in the case of Stephens
_v._ Hill, 10 M. and W.]


[Footnote 21: NOTE 21. Page 490.

The law regulating the "qualification," in respect of property,
requisite to render a man eligible for a seat in Parliament, has been
recently--viz., by stat. 1 and 2 Vict. c. 48,--altogether altered. Real
or _personal_ property to the extent of £600 a-year, now gives a
sufficient qualification to a _county_ member, and to the extent of 300,
to a member for a borough.]


[Footnote 22: NOTE 22. Page 491.

The privilege of franking letters, so long enjoyed by the members of
both Houses of Parliament, has been recently abolished. After the
introduction of the penny postage system, the privilege in question was
very greatly reduced in value and importance. By statute 3 and 4 Vict.
c. 96, § 56, (passed on the 10th August 1840,) "All privileges
whatsoever of sending letters by the post free of postage, or at a
reduced rate of postage, shall, except in the cases in that act
specified, wholly cease and determine."]


[Footnote 23: NOTE 23. Page 492.

These are the abbreviations of the technical words by which are known
the two writs of execution against a debtor's _person_, and his _goods_.
The former "Ca. Sa." represent the words addressed to the sheriff,
"_Ca_pias A. B. [the defendant] ad _sa_tisfaciendum." The latter
represent the words addressed to the sheriff, commanding him "ut _fi_eri
_fa_ciat"--that he should cause to be made, or realized, out of the
defendant's goods, the amount due to the plaintiff.]


[Footnote 24: NOTE 24. Page 505.

The certificate of a bankrupt no longer depends upon the mere will and
pleasure of his creditors, but upon the discretion of the commissioner,
or judge in bankruptcy, who has become acquainted with the whole conduct
of the bankrupt, and may grant, refuse, or postpone a certificate, and
annex such conditions to a grant of it as he may think fitting. This
very important and salutary alteration of the law was effected by
statute 5 and 6 Vict. c. 122, § 39, passed on the 12th August 1842. This
power has been exercised on several recent occasions, in a manner highly
satisfactory to the public, and creditable to the acuteness, discretion,
and firmness of the court.]


     THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *




                  LIBRARY EDITION OF THE ROMANCES
                                  OF
                           ALEXANDRE DUMAS.

             _The only complete translation into English.
             This has been accepted as the standard edition
             in both the United States and England._


     Plain Cloth, gilt top                             $1.25 per volume
     Decorated cloth, gilt top                          1.50 "
     Half calf or half morocco, gilt top (in sets)      3.00 "

              => _Any story can be supplied separately._


                    HISTORICAL AND REGENCY ROMANCES.

     THE TWO DEANAS                                         3 vols.
     THE PAGE OF THE DUKE OF SAVOY                          2 vols.
     THE BLACK TULIP                                        1 vol.
     OLYMPE DE CLÈVES                                       2 vols.
     CHEVALIER D'HARMENTAL                                  1 vol.
     THE REGENT'S DAUGHTER                                  1 vol.

     Ten volumes in box, with ten etchings and photogravures.


                          THE VALOIS ROMANCES.

     MARGUERITE DE VALOIS                                   2 vols.
     LA DAME DE MONSOREAU                                   2 vols.
     THE FORTY-FIVE                                         2 vols.

     Six volumes in box, with six etchings and photogravures.


                        THE D'ARTAGNAN ROMANCES.

     THE THREE MUSKETEERS                                   2 vols.
     TWENTY YEARS AFTER                                     2 vols.
     THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE; or, TEN YEARS LATER         6 vols.

     Ten volumes in box, with ten etchings and photogravures.


                         THE NAPOLEON ROMANCES.

     THE COMPANIONS OF JEHU                                 2 vols.
     THE WHITES AND THE BLUES                               2 vols.
     THE SHE-WOLVES OF MACHECOUL,
       and THE CORSICAN BROTHERS                            2 vols.

     Six volumes in box, with twenty-four illustrations.


                       THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO.

     Four volumes in box, with eight photogravure plates.


                     THE MARIE ANTOINETTE ROMANCES.

     MEMOIRS OF A PHYSICIAN                                 3 vols.
     THE QUEEN'S NECKLACE                                   2 vols.
     ANGE PITOU                                             2 vols.
     LA COMTESSE DE CHARNY                                  4 vols.
     LE CHEVALIER DE MAISON-ROUGE                           1 vol.

     Twelve volumes in box, with twelve etchings and photogravures.


                   THE DUMAS ROMANCES. New Series, I.

     ASCANTO                                                2 vols.
     THE WAR OF WOMEN                                       2 vols.
     BLACK, THE STORY OF A DOG                              1 vol.
     TALES OF THE CAUCASUS: comprising
       THE BALL OF SNOW AND SULTANETTA                      1 vol.

     Six volumes in box, with six etchings and photogravures.


                   THE DUMAS ROMANCES. New Series, II.

     AGÉNOR DE MAULÉON                                      2 vols.
     THE BRIGAND, and BLANCHE DE BEAULIEU                   1 vol.
     THE HOROSCOPE                                          1 vol.
     SYLVANDIRE                                             1 vol.
     MONSIEUR DE CHAUVELIN'S WILL, and
       THE WOMAN WITH THE VELVET NECKLACE                   1 vol.

     Six volumes in box, with eighteen etchings and photogravures.

     The Complete Set of Dumas Romances, Sixty Volumes, 12mo with
     ninety-four plates.


                  LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY, PUBLISHERS,
                       254 WASHINGTON STREET, BOSTON.




     _BALZAC'S NOVELS_                                    CENTENARY
                                                          EDITION


                        LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE
                       _OF HONORÉ DE BALZAC_

     _Translated by_ =KATHARINE PRESCOTT WORMELEY=

     Issued by arrangement with Messrs. HARDY, PRATT & CO.

     Illustrated with 96 photogravure plates by Goupil from original
     pictures by Wagrez, Jeanniot, Georges Cain, Adrien Moreau, George
     Roux, Gustave Bourgain, and other noted French artists.

     Cloth, extra, gilt top. 33 vols. 12mo. $1.50 per volume.

     _A conscientious and impartial comparison of Miss Wormeley's
     translations with those of her predecessors and present rivals
     must leave a conviction that for accuracy, sympathy, discretion,
     and editorial judgment she stands alone.--New York Tribune._


                           LIST OF VOLUMES

     SCENES FROM PRIVATE LIFE. 6 vols.
       Vol. I. PÈRE GORIOT; and THE MARRIAGE CONTRACT. Vol. II. TWO
       YOUNG MARRIED WOMEN; and ALBERT SAVARUS. Vol. III. FAME
       AND SORROW, and Other Stories. Vol. IV. MODESTE MIGNON; THE
       PEACE OF A HOME, etc. Vol. V. A START IN LIFE; VENDETTA,
       etc. Vol. VI. BEATRIX; and A COMMISSION IN LUNACY.

     SCENES FROM PROVINCIAL LIFE. 6 vols.
       Vol. VII. EUGÉNIE GRANDET; and PIERRETTE. Vol. VIII. THE TWO
       BROTHERS; and AN OLD MAID. Vol. IX. LILY OF THE VALLEY; and
       GALLERY OF ANTIQUITIES. Vol. X. URSULA; and THE VICAR OF TOURS.
       Vol. XI. LOST ILLUSIONS; and THE ILLUSTRIOUS GAUDISSART. Vol.
       XII. A GREAT MAN OF THE PROVINCES IN PARIS.

     SCENES FROM PARISIAN LIFE. 7 vols.
       Vol. XIII. LUCIEN DE RUBEMPRÉ; and THE DUCHESSE DE LANGEAIS.
       Vol. XIV. THE LAST INCARNATION OF VAUTRIN; FERRAGUS, etc.
       Vol. XV. RISE AND FALL OF CÉSAR BIROTTEAU; NUCINGEN AND CO.,
       BANKERS; and ANOTHER STUDY OF WOMAN. Vol. XVI. BUREAUCRACY;
       PRINCESSE DE CADIGNAN, etc. Vol. XVII. THE LESSER
       BOURGEOISIE. Vol. XVIII. COUSIN BETTE. Vol. XIX. COUSIN PONS.

     SCENES FROM MILITARY LIFE. 1 vol.
       Vol. XX. THE CHOUANS; and A PASSION IN THE DESERT.

     SCENES FROM POLITICAL LIFE. 3 vols.
       Vol. XXI. AN HISTORICAL MYSTERY; EPISODE UNDER THE TERROR.
       Vol. XXII. THE BROTHERHOOD OF CONSOLATION; and Z. MARCAS.
       Vol. XXIII. THE DEPUTY OF ARCIS.

     SCENES FROM COUNTRY LIFE. 3 vols.
       Vol. XXIV. THE COUNTRY DOCTOR. Vol. XXV. THE VILLAGE
       RECTOR. Vol. XXVI. SONS OF THE SOIL.

     PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES. 5 vols.
       Vol. XXVII. CATHERINE DE' MEDICI. Vol. XXVIII. SERAPHITA;
       and THE ALKAHEST. Vol. XXIX. THE MAGIC SKIN; and THE HIDDEN
       MASTERPIECE. Vol. XXX. LOUIS LAMBERT, etc. Vol. XXXI. JUANA,
       etc.

     MEMOIR AND PERSONAL OPINIONS. 2 vols.
       Vol. XXXII.  MEMOIR by KATHARINE PRESCOTT WORMELEY.
       Vol. XXXIII. THE PERSONAL OPINIONS OF BALZAC.


              LITTLE, BROWN, & CO., Publishers, Boston




                      Alphonse Daudet in English.

     =New Uniform Edition of the Novels, Romances, and Memoirs of
     Alphonse Daudet, the greatest French Writer since Victor Hugo.=
     Newly Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley, Translator of
     Balzac's Novels; Jane Minot Sedgwick, Translator of George Sand;
     Charles de Kay, and others.

     Printed from large clear type, with Frontispieces. Twenty volumes.
                 12mo. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 per volume.

                      _Arrangement of the volumes._

     ALPHONSE DAUDET. By Léon Daudet. To which is added
       "My Brother and Myself," by Ernest Daudet            1 vol.
     FROMONT AND RISLER                                     1 vol.
     THE NABOB                                              2 vols.
     KINGS IN EXILE                                         1 vol.
     NUMA ROUMESTAN                                         1 vol.
     THE LITTLE PARISH and ROBERT HELMONT                   1 vol.
     LITTLE WHAT'S HIS NAME                                 1 vol.
     TARTARIN OF TARASCON and TARTARIN ON THE ALPS          1 vol.
     PORT TARASCON and LA BELLE NIVERNAISE                  1 vol.
     THIRTY YEARS IN PARIS, etc.                            1 vol.
     THE IMMORTAL, etc.                                     1 vol.
     SOUVENIRS OF A MAN OF LETTERS and ARTISTS' WIVES       1 vol.
     THE EVANGELIST and ROSE AND NINETTE                    1 vol.
     JACK                                                   2 vols.
     MONDAY TALES                                           1 vol.
     LETTERS FROM MY MILL, etc.                             1 vol.
     SAPPHO                                                 1 vol.
     THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY                                 1 vol.

     "Of the brilliant group of men who have made contemporaneous French
     literature, of that coterie toward which the eyes of all the
     reading world have been turned with admiration and interest during
     the last half a century, Daudet was the greatest. He was the most
     universal, the most original, the most human."--_From an Article in
     The Book Buyer, by L. Van Vorst._

     Has, perhaps, transferred bodily into his writings more actual
     events, related in the newspapers, in the court-house, or in
     society, than any other writer of the present age. Of some of his
     novels one hardly dare say that they are works of fiction; their
     characters are men and women of our time; they do in the book
     almost exactly what they had done in real life.--_Prof. Adolph
     Cohn, in The Bookman._

     He is a novelist to his finger-tips. No one has such grace, such
     lightness and brilliancy of execution.--_Henry James, in The
     Century._

     The slightest pages from his pen will preserve the vibration of his
     soul so long as our tongue exists imperishable. He is the author of
     twenty masterpieces.--ÉMILE ZOLA.


                  LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY, PUBLISHERS,
                       254 WASHINGTON STREET, BOSTON.







End of Project Gutenberg's Ten Thousand a-Year. Volume 3., by Samuel Warren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR. VOLUME 3. ***

***** This file should be named 41247-0.txt or 41247-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/2/4/41247/

Produced by Matthias Grammel, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

